The paternal uncle (patient number 7107; P4, II, 3), although not tested, has a presentation evocating a GATA2 mutation with recurrent warts associated with mild neutropenia and monocytopenia.
Patients with CMML-2 were more likely to have lower hemoglobin levels (P = 0.04), higher AMC (P = 0.03), lower platelet counts (P = 0.0007), higher likelihood of circulating blasts and IMC (P<0.0001), and higher risk of karyotypic abnormalities (P<0.0001).
Patients with t(15;17) were excluded from any analyses.
During this transition from the FAB system to the WHO classification, the percent blasts threshold for defining high-grade MDS and AML was lowered.
Presumably, these results reflect differences in analytical sensitivity among the participating laboratories.
Moreover, knockdown of Asxl1 using shRNA in vivo in a mouse model of haematopoietic NrasG12D overexpression resulted in accelerated disease latency and increased disease burden in vivo, with concomitant loss of Asxl1 (REF. 86).
Before the evolution to MDS or AML, a median of 4 blood counts were available per patient.
[END OF ABSTRACT].
Using a mammalian suppressor mutation approach, the functional importance of the GATA1/FOG1 interaction was established, showing that physical association of GATA1 with FOG1 is required for erythroid differentiation.
Moreover, it has been reported in a zebrafish model that GATA2 is regulated by the microRNA (miRNA) miR-451.
Somatic deletions and inactivating mutations in TET2 were identified in MPN and MDS based on mapping of loss-of-heterozygosity and microdeletions within a minimal region of chromosome 4q24 (REFS 25,26).
Kaplan-Meier survival curves corresponding to the 5 score categories were significantly different by log rank-test (Figure 6, P <.001).
Karyotype.
Clinical parameters studied included age, gender, overall survival (OS), and blood counts.
As indicated above, GATA2 expression is critical throughout various stages of hematopoiesis, and its levels partly determine the fate along different myeloid cell lineages; for this reason, GATA2 expression is tightly regulated.
At present, only limited information is available about the distribution of BCOR and BCORL1 mutations across the main cytogenetic/molecular AML categories.
Although obtaining a remission is the first step in controlling the disease, it is also important for patients to emerge from the induction phase in a condition to tolerate subsequent, more intensive treatments during consolidation to achieve durable disease control.
In addition, HLA testing should be performed promptly in those who may be candidates for either fully ablative or reduced-intensity allogeneic HSCT from a matched sibling or an unrelated donor, which constitutes the best option for long-term disease control.
We and other groups recently identified a variety of new mutations present at distinct frequencies in subgroups of patients with MDS.
However, more than half of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes have a normal karyotype, and patients with identical chromosomal abnormalities are often clinically heterogeneous.
The first reported pegylated INF-alpha (90 mug/week) induced hematologic remission in approximately 80% of patients with PV and 81% of patients with ET (complete remission in 70% with PV and 76% with ET) and molecular remission in 54% of patients with PV and 38% with ET.
OS was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier product limit method, and survival curves of different subgroups (JAK2-mutant, CALR-mutant, MPL-mutant, and triple-negative patients) were compared by the log-rank test.
Studies are now needed to specifically compare triple-negative PMF with the myelodysplastic syndrome associated with bone marrow fibrosis, but a nonnegligible overlap between the 2 conditions is predictable.
We identified additional somatic mutations in spliceosomal genes, including SF3B1, U2AF1, and SRSF2.
The serious and usually sudden infections occurring in 4 patients led to their deaths.
Notably, the regulatory elements responsible for GATA2 gene expression also harbor GATA motifs.
These tended to be low positive when tested in laboratories using quantitative assays, so it is likely that these specimens had JAK2 V617F levels that were below the limit of detection for most laboratories.
SNP array analysis revealed chromosome 7 deletions in 14 out of 102 subjects and loss of heterozygosity due to uniparental disomy (UPD) in two subjects (Fig. 1a).
Each laboratory was asked to provide three DNA specimens: one known to be JAK2 V617F positive, one weakly positive, and one from a patient suspected to have a MPN but that was found to be JAK2 V617F negative.
Recently, Simon et al reported that GATA2 acts as a regulator of the angiopoietin-2 (ANG2) transcription, a gene crucial for angiogenesis.
The high frequency of mutations in different components of the RNA splicing machinery in MDS suggests that abnormal RNA splicing is the common consequence of these mutations, which is relevant to the pathogenesis of MDS.
We propose limiting the use of hematopoietic growth factors and implementing intensive treatment such as allograft in patients with neutropenia and GATA2 mutations as soon as an unrelated donor has been identified.
The MD Anderson Prognostic Scoring System (MDAPS) was developed in a cohort of 213 CMML patients and identified a hemoglobin level <12 g/dl, presence of circulating immature myeloid cells (IMCs), absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) >2.5 x 109/l and >10% BM blasts as independent predictors for inferior survival.
Based on their analysis, three cytogenetic risk categories were identified: low risk (diploid karyotype or loss of chromosome Y as a single anomaly), intermediate risk (all other abnormalities except those mentioned in low- and high-risk categories) and high risk (trisomy 8, abnormalities of chromosome 7 or complex karyotype); with 5-year OS for the three groups being 35%, 26% and 4%, respectively (P<0.001).
Mutations in six genes - ASXL1,RUNX1, TP53, EZH2, CBL, and ETV6 - were significant predictors of poor overall survival, after adjustment for IPSS risk group, and were found in 74 of 255 samples (29.0%) with normal cytogenetic features.
Further, we performed cox multivariable analysis of myeloid malignancy subtypes and identified that presence of the STAG2 mutation predicted poor survival independent of age, sex, and IPSS scores in high- and low-risk MDS patients (hazard ratio [HR] = 1.5 [0.9, 2.6]; P = .11) and in patients with MDS who survived beyond 12 months (HR = 2.1 [1.1, 3.8]; P = .017; Figure 3).
Recent studies have shown that the placement of 5-hmC leads to active demethylation through the activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID)-APOBEC DNA repair pathway (FIG. 1).
In the current work, we studied a large population of patients with PMF followed at 4 different centers and analyzed the impact of driver mutations of JAK2, CALR, or MPL on clinical course, risk of leukemic transformation, and OS.
In addition, the discovery of these mutations, particularly if pathogenic or initiating, will provide important avenues for exploring novel therapeutic approaches toward modulating their effectors' activity.
The mutational status for cohesin complex genes (STAG2, STAG1, RAD21, SMC3, SMC1A, PDS5B, WAPAL, MAU2, REC8, NIPBL, SMC5, and ESCO2) were analyzed in bone marrow and blood specimens of 1060 patients with MDS (n = 386), MPNs (n = 55), MDS/MPNs (n = 169), and sAML (n = 149) that evolved from these conditions and pAML (n = 301), including 200 patients in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) AML cohort (see supplemental Table 1, available at the Blood Web site).
Principles of AML Treatment.
RNA splicing is accomplished by recruitment and disengagement of multiple snRNP complexes and other protein factors to newly transcribed pre-mRNA, through which exon-intron boundaries are recognized and intronic sequences were correctly spliced out to generate mature mRNA.
In contrast, in various malignancies, overexpression of EZH2 has been reported, suggesting that EZH2 might also act as an oncogene.
By contrast, the use of Illumina Infinium 27k methylation arrays to examine samples from patients with MDS and other chronic myeloid malignancies with TET2 mutations suggested that there was no significant difference in DNA methylation between bone marrow samples from patients with high 5-hmC levels versus healthy controls.
Additional exon 12 mutations have been reported, but their clinical significance is unknown.
We found that among the initially screened cohort of patients with myeloid malignancies, mutations were highly recurrent in U2AF1, SF3B1, and SRSF2, whereas mutations of other spliceosomal genes were each detected in 1 of 120 cases, indicating a frequency of < 1%.
These observations indicate that driver mutations define distinct disease entities within PMF.
These observations were validated in the Mayo Clinic cohort where mutation and survival analyses were performed from time of referral.
ASXL1 (additional sex combs-like 1 gene) is the key regulator in histone modification via its interaction with PRC2 (polycomb complex 2), which methylates the 27th lysine residue of histone H3 (H3K27).
These results establish fundamental principles underlying GATA factor mechanisms in chromatin and illustrate a complex network of considerable importance for the control of hematopoiesis.
Thrombotic complications occurred in 76 of 617 patients (12%) with PMF.
Further work in mice and humans is needed for the identification and functional validation of collaborating genetic events that cooperate with TET2 mutations in myeloid malignancies.
Mutations in ASXL1, EZH2, and UTX have been identified in MDS and appear to alter histone biology, resulting in dysregulation of gene expression in MDS.
During the past decade, there have been major efforts to better define the genetic lesions underlying the large group of AML with normal cytogenetics (CN-AML) that accounts for 40-50% of all AML cases.
The 10-year cumulative incidence of leukemic transformation was 19.4% (95% CI, 13.9-25.6) in JAK2-mutant, 9.4% (95% CI, 4.3-16.8) in CALR-mutant, 16.9% (95% CI, 4.1-37.1) in MPL-mutant, and 34.4% (95% CI, 16.8-52.8) in triple-negative subjects (Figure 3).
Comparison among the 12 laboratories performing quantitative JAK2 V617F assays was complicated by the various ways in which the laboratories reported their results.
Immunoglobulin levels were almost in the normal range.
The molecular basis of the 'GATA factor switching' resides in a gene expression regulatory network utilizing the cis-acting GATA motifs in the GATA1 and GATA2 genes.
Therefore, the importance of obtaining adequate samples of marrow or peripheral blood at diagnosis for full karyotyping and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) cytogenetic analysis for the most common abnormalities cannot be overemphasized.
The authors also noted that a survival benefit was not observed in the subgroup of patients undergoing allogeneic HSCT in first CR because of an increased incidence of nonrelapse mortality.
The prospectively defined cut-off point for data analysis occurred when half the patients remaining in the study had completed the week 36 visit and when all the patients had completed the week 24 evaluation or discontinued treatment.
Use of both the HpaII tiny fragment enrichment by ligation-mediated PCR assay (HELP assay) and LC-MS to detect global levels of DNA methylation in AML patient samples with TET2 mutations revealed hypermethylation as well as lower global 5-hmC levels.
Others have demonstrated that patients with SF3B1-mutated RARS had abnormal splicing of ABCB7 in mitochondria, further strengthening the hypothesis of mitochondrial dysregulation.
To determine the functional effect of spliceosomal mutations, we evaluated pre-mRNA splicing profiles by RNA deep sequencing.
When the survival benefit of SF3B1 mutations was examined in patients with MDS with increased RS, the presence of SF3B1 mutations was associated with better OS and LFS in univariate analysis; however, significance was completely accounted for by the World Health Organization categorization for morphologic risk, and no additional prognostic value from the presence or absence of SF3B1 mutations was observed when RARS and RCMD-RS were analyzed separately.
The G-MDAPS was validated in 176 patients with CMML and leukocytosis (>12 x 109/l), with median survivals in the four risk categories being 33, 19, 12 and 8 months, respectively (P<0.01); limitations for G-MDAPS included the inclusion of patients with upto 30% BM blasts (oligoblastic AML).
Anemia and thrombocytopenia were more common in patients who received ruxolitinib than in patients who received placebo.
[END OF ABSTRACT].
Leukemia-free survival was significantly shorter in the mutationally high-risk group (P<0.0001) and the cumulative risk of leukemia using competitive risk analysis was significantly increased (HR: 2.96; 95% CI: 1.85-4.76; P<0.0001) compared with mutationally low-risk (Figure 2d); this was confirmed by multivariable analysis that included IPSS (P<0.001), unfavorable karyotype (P<0.007) or both (P = 0.024) (Supplementary Table S3).
The observation that most mutations are nonsense and frameshift types suggests that cohesin mutations lead to decreased function of the cohesin complex.
DIAGNOSIS.
Seventeen patients who received ruxolitinib (11.0%) and 16 patients who received placebo (10.6%) discontinued the study treatment because of adverse events (of any grade).
In the aforementioned EORTC/GIMEMA trial, the 4-year DFS rate among patients with intermediate-risk AML was 48.5% for the nodonor group (n = 104; 62.5% underwent HSCT) and 45% for the donor group (n = 61; 75% underwent HSCT).
In our study, 87 (49%) patients had an ASXL1 mutation, with 47 (28%) of these being c.1934dupG;p.Gly646TrpfsX12.
The latter has been shown to reduce the incidence of life-threatening pancytopenia.
Other indications for JAK2 mutation analysis include splanchnic vein thrombosis and the provisional entity refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis (RARS-T).
A heterogeneous group of malignant haematopoietic disorders that are characterized by dysplastic and ineffective blood cell production and a variable risk of transformation to acute leukaemia.
Both translocations and mutations of ETV6 have been identified in acute myeloid leukemia, and translocations have been described in rare cases of myelodysplastic syndromes, but ETV6 mutations have not previously been reported in myelodysplastic syndromes.
Therefore, whether GATA2 influences prognosis in patients with AML has not been determined.
Also in the Mayo cohort, ASXL1 mutations were more likely to occur in the presence of normal karyotype (37% versus 19%; P = 0.003) and were not different between favorable and unfavorable cytogenetic categories.
The specific diagnostic criteria are presented below.
Our survey of more than 900 mutations in 111 cancer-associated genes identified only 6 mutated oncogenes, which were present in less than 10% of samples.
The findings of this study clearly indicate that the genetic basis of disease and, more specifically, the driver mutation responsible for clinical phenotype is an independent predictor of clinical course and outcomes, and that accounting for that can improve the risk stratification provided by IPSS.
Each potential mutation was compared against databases of known SNPs, including Entrez Gene and the Ensembl Genome Browser.
In both reports, the authors revealed that the oncogenicity of IDH1 mutants in neural and haematopoietic cells may depend on the increased activity of the EGLN family, which are alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent prolyl hydroxylases that normally mark the oxygen-labile subunit of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) for proteasomal degradation.
Paired-end 90-bp reads were generated and subjected to data analysis with the use of the platform provided by DNAnexus.
In the EORTC/GIMEMA trial comparing outcomes between patients aged 45 or younger in no-donor (patients in CR planned for autologous HSCT) versus donor groups (patients in CR with matched sibling donor planned for allogeneic HSCT) on an intent-to-treat basis, the 4-year DFS rate for the subgroup with good-risk cytogenetics [eg, t(8;21) or inv(16)] was 66% for the no-donor group (n = 73; 63% underwent HSCT) and 62% for the donor group (n = 50; 72% underwent HSCT).
The long concatenated DNA was then sheared into 100 to 250 bp fragments using the Covaris System (Covaris, Woburn, MA) to obtain randomly fragmented sequences, and was size selected for 200 bp fragments using Agencourt AMPure XP reagent (Agencourt Bioscience Corp., Beverly, MA).
Exclusionary criteria include no evidence of a reactive neutrophilia, other MPN, MDS, or overlap MDS/MPN disorder.
Mutations of SETBP1 (at 18q12.3) are found in 2.2% to 4.3% of MDS patients and 6.2% to 15% of CMML patients.
The genetic subtypes of PMF differ substantially as regards clinical course, disease progression, and overall survival.
Dickinson's group observed the signs of disease progression in patients with GATA2 mutation as elevated FLT3L, loss of bone marrow progenitors, depletion of transitional B cells, naive T cells, and NK cells, as well as clonal myelopoiesis.
These distinct mechanisms may contribute to the differential downstream signaling and drug sensitivity of truncation vs membrane proximal mutations.
Notably, genome-wide GATA1 and GATA2 occupancy of GATA motifs has been also investigated by ChIP-sequencing analysis.
MPL and JAK2 mutations are not mutually exclusive, and rare cases of concurrent MPL mutation and JAK2 V617F mutation have been reported.
Perturbation of other functions of cohesin complex genes may contribute to hematopoietic transformation, particularly through their role in regulating gene expression and DNA-loop formation.
Subsequent analysis identified the MPLW515L mutation that resulted in a MPN-like disorder in a murine bone marrow transplant assay.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm whose cardinal features include extensive extramedullary hematopoiesis, associated with marked hepatosplenomegaly, anemia that is often transfusion-dependent and profound constitutional symptoms.
8.2. OVEREXPRESSION OF GATA2 IN ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA.
ASXL1 mutations are generally frameshift, resulting in truncation and loss-of-function, with subsequent loss of PRC2-mediated histone lysine 27 methylation.
Because of their often protracted course, MDSs recapitulate the stages of acquisition of a malignant phenotype, thereby offering insights into leukemogenesis.
IDH1 functions in the cytoplasm and in peroxisomes, whereas IDH2 functions in the mitochondria.
In this analysis of 389 well-characterized patients with AML, we identified somatic mutations in the cohesin complex in 5.9% of patients.
Moreover, loss of PRC2 components in mouse models of APL results in differentiation of APL cells.
Only 17% of patients were assigned to an IPSS risk group that differed from the group assigned at the time of diagnosis.
This prognostic significance was observed when IDH1 and IDH2 mutations were separately analyzed, although patient numbers were small for each subgroup and statistical significance was reached only for the relapse-free survival analysis.
As an international collaborative effort, we are currently analyzing clinical, hematologic, and molecular data of a large population of PMF patients with the aim of developing a clinically useful prognostic tool.
Of the 617 PMF patients, the clinical-molecular risk was very low in 71 patients, low in 150 patients, intermediate in 202 patients, high in 141 patients, and very high in 53 patients.
Accumulating evidence supports that lineage-specific transcription factors actively maintain homeostasis within the hematopoietic system through the accurate orchestration of cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival.
This is particularly true of elderly patients with AML.
In patients with the favorable-risk CBF AML [eg, t(8;21) or inv(16)], the presence of a mutation in c-KIT significantly increased the risk of relapse.
Figure 1. (a) Frequencies and distribution of mutations.  Frequencies are given for molecular mutations in EZH2, TET2, ASXL1, CBL, NRAS, KRAS, JAK2, RUNX1, IDH1, IDH2, NPM1 and MPL.  Each patient is represented by a colored box.  The patient cohort is further annotated according to karyotype and diagnostic category.  Kaplan-Meier survival estimates of 81 CMML cases. (b) Data are shown for overall survival of CMML patients including EZH2-mutated patients (n = 9) and EZH2 wild-type patients (n = 72; alive at 3 years: 33.3 versus 69.9%). (c) Data are shown for overall survival of CMML patients including EZH2-mutated patients (n = 9), EZH2/TET2 wild-type patients (n = 40) and TET2-mutated patients with EZH2 wild-type (n = 32; alive at 3 years: 33.9 versus 49.7 versus 89.8%).
Results.
A clonal disorder of haematopoiesis that is characterized by the expansion of monocytes within the bone marrow and/or peripheral blood, as well as dysplasia of myeloid-precursor cellular elements.
Radiation or surgical resection may be incorporated with systemic chemotherapy in emergent situations; however, these modalities, if needed at all, should be optimally deferred until count recovery to avoid excess toxicity.
To assess whether mutations were acquired, T cells from the same individuals were analyzed or allelic discrimination assays were applied to show that the mutations were absent in a cohort of 250 unaffected donors (Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Table 2 and Supplementary Fig. 5). Detected SNPs are summarized in Supplementary Table 3.
In some cases these mutations occur in genes with known roles in regulating chromatin and/or methylation states in haematopoietic progenitors, and in other cases genetic and functional studies have elucidated a role for specific mutations in altering epigenetic patterning in myeloid malignancies.
DISCUSSION.
Best supportive care is always an option for patients who cannot tolerate or do not wish to pursue further intensive treatment.
Similar results were obtained when considering NPM1-mutated CN-AML patients or when looking at the different prognostic groups in the European LeukemiaNet classification (data not shown).
DNMT3A (DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3 alpha gene; located at 2p23) encodes a DNA methyltransferase that catalyzes the incorporation of methyl groups to the cytosine residue of CpG dinucleotides, effectively controlling epigenetically manipulated gene expression.
EZH2 encodes the catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2, a highly conserved histone H3 lysine 27 methyltransferase that influences stem cell renewal by epigenetic modification.
S4 in the Supplementary Appendix).
In the European cohort, leukemia-free survival was negatively affected by IDH1/2, SRSF2 and ASXL1 mutations and in the Mayo cohort by IDH1 and SRSF2 mutations.
Do BCOR and BCORL1 mutations have any clinical impact in AML?
Statistical analysis.
All the cases were AML de novo, from 18 to 76 years old.
Ling Zhang; Eric Padron; Jeffrey Lancet.
JAK2V617F is the best characterized mutation in BCR-ABL1-negative neoplasms, with an estimated prevalence of more than 95% in PV, 50% in ET, and 50% in PMF.
In the last year, genes in the cohesin complex have been described as novel mutations occurring in 13% of AML patients, suggesting that the cohesin-complex presents an important pathway in the pathogenesis of AML.
Mutation of R882 occurred in nearly 60% of the DNMT3A-mutant samples (37 of 62 mutations) and has been shown to decrease catalytic activity and DNA binding affinity.
Taken together, our data suggest that cohesin mutations do not affect patient prognosis.
Most patients with EZH2 or ASXL1 mutations had low or intermediate-1 risk according to the IPSS (86% and 73%, respectively).
We applied nextgeneration amplicon deep-sequencing using the small volume Titanium assay (454 Life Sciences, Branford, CT, USA).
In fact, in erythroid cells, it activates erythroid-specific genes and also contributes to the repression of genes associate with a proliferative state.
Srdan Verstovsek; Ruben A. Mesa; Jason Gotlib; Richard S. Levy; Vikas Gupta; John F. DiPersio; John V. Catalano; Michael Deininger; Carole Miller; Richard T. Silver; Moshe Talpaz; Elliott F. Winton; Jimmie H. Harvey; Jr.; Murat O. Arcasoy; Elizabeth Hexner; Roger M. Lyons; Ronald Paquette; Azra Raza; Kris Vaddi; Susan Erickson-Viitanen; Iphigenia L. Koumenis; M.S.; William Sun; Victor Sandor; Hagop M. Kantarjian.
In the HOVON trial, the benefit in OS outcomes for the dose-escalated daunorubicin group was observed only in patients aged 65 years and younger or in those with CBF translocations.
As previously mentioned, the Gata2 knock-out mouse has profound defects in definitive hematopoiesis: Gata2-deficient embryos are anemic, have moderately reduced numbers of primitive erythroid cells and HPCs, and die at day 10-11 of gestation, demonstrating that GATA2 is essential in the earliest stages of hematopoiesis.
When presented with rare cases such as acute leukemias of ambiguous lineage (including mixed phenotype acute leukemias, as defined by the 2008 WHO classification), consultation with an experienced hematopathologist should be sought.
Although studies in the Swedish Leukemia Registry documented improvement in outcomes for patients younger than 60 years over the past 3 decades, no similar improvement was observed for the older population.
Multivariable analysis, using IDH1, transfusion dependence, and risk parameter variables from the revised International Prognostic Scoring System (R-IPSS), showed that presence of mutant IDH1, but not IDH2, was the single variable associated with inferior leukemia-free survival.
The rate of discontinuation of the study drug because of adverse events was 11.0% in the ruxolitinib group and 10.6% in the placebo group.
The normal role of CSF3R in promoting neutrophil production is biologically consistent with our observation of CSF3R activating mutations in hematologic malignancies characterized by high levels of neutrophils.
Mutations associated with CN-AML include those affecting NPM1, FLT3, MLL, CEBPA, TET2, ASXL1, IDH1, IDH2, DNMT3A, RUNX1 and other genes.
Third, mutations with a quality score of <8000 or an allele frequency of <15% were excluded.
Mutations in other exons include V501A, Y252H, and S204P (Figure 2).
Thirteen deaths occurred in the ruxolitinib group as compared with 24 deaths in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% confidence interval, 0.25 to 0.98; P = 0.04).
The risk of transformation at the age of 10, 20, or 30 was, respectively, 6%, 54%, and 63% (Figure 2B).
Granulocytic dysplasia is not present, and there is no monocytosis, eosinophilia, or basophilia.
Rare mutations in TET2, ASXL1, IDH1/IDH2, EZH2, DNMT3A, and CBL have been described, although the precise roles of these mutations in the pathogenesis of ET and PMF are unknown.
As of their prognostic relevance in the European cohort (see below), mutation analyses in the Mayo cohort were focused on ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, IDH1 and IDH2; the corresponding mutational frequencies were 31% (85 out of 279 studied cases), 15% (52 of 358), 6% (15 of 270), 3% (10 of 374) and 2% (7 of 374).
C-terminal mutations of RUNX1 were detected in nine patients with CMML; they would have been overlooked had the mutation analysis not included exons 7b and 8 of the RUNX1 gene.
MDS may occur de novo or arise years after exposure to mutagens (including radiation and some types of chemotherapy).
Abbreviations: AVWS = acute von Willebrand syndrome; ET = essential thrombocythemia; Hct = hematocrit.
Histopathologic and clinical features of CNL and aCML.
Recently, we characterized 81 cases according to cytogenetics and mutations in seven candidate genes, detecting an overall mutation rate of 72.8%.
TET2 mutations were not exclusive of abnormalities in other epigenetic regulators such as the chromatin-modifying genes ASXL1 and EZH2.
Findings were similar for each individual mutation, with clonal expansion in 7 of 8 patients with STAG2 mutations (P = .05), 2 of 4 SMC3 mutant patients, as well as in the single patient with a RAD21 mutation.
We compared the allelic burden of mutations in the cohesin complex with the allelic burden of NPM1 mutations, as the level of the allelic burden can indicate clonal hierarchy of different mutations.
Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia (aCML) is an uncommon myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative (MDS/MPN) neoplasm, with a relative incidence estimated at 1 to 2 cases for every 100 patients with BCR-ABL1-positive chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Indeed, U2AF1 and SRSF2 mutations were associated with worse survival in CMML and low-risk MDS, respectively.
On the other hand, GATA1 activates known erythroid and megakaryocyte specific genes and functions as a repressor of genes that mark the immature state of erythroid precursor cells, including GATA2 and KIT.
Dawson et al showed that JAK2 localizes to the nucleus and phosphorylates Y41 of histone H3.
Mutations and translocations involving mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL) as well as mutations in Polycomb repressive complex (PRC) components and interacting proteins affect histone modifications and can promote myeloid transformation.
The lymphocyte count was also low, with a median at 1.1 G/L (25th percentile: 1.0; 75th percentile: 1.7); with B cells and NK cells were also low.
Treatment-related mortality frequently exceeds any expected transient response in this group, particularly in patients older than 75 years or in those who have significant comorbid conditions or ECOG performance status greater than 2.
A subsequent study investigated whether the acquisition of the above factors during follow-up predicted survival of PMF patients, and eventually led to the development of the dynamic IPSS (DIPSS).
Mutations in IDH2 have been reported in 8% to 12% of patients with AML, with a frequency of 19% reported among those with normal karyotype.
Tagged next-generation amplicon deep-sequencing primer sequences are available online (Supplementary Table 3).
Analysis of copy number state was done using BRLMM-PPlus algorithm with regional GC correction, embedded in Genotyping Console Version 2.0 and Chromosome Analysis Suite software (Affymetrix).
This technique can reliably detect mutations present at a frequency of 10% or higher.
The majority of patients receiving placebo had spleen growth.
The approach to validation differs between qualitative and quantitative assays.
Moreover, no homozygous mutations were found in patients with UPD21q (n = 8).
JAK2V617F remains the best clinical marker of disease despite the identification of numerous other mutations prevalent in subsets of MPN.
Initial Evaluation.
Notably, in each model published to date, there was a considerable latency before mice developed overt myeloid leukaemias, which suggests that secondary events are required for specific disease phenotypes.
Paired BM mononuclear cells and CD3+ peripheral blood lymphocytes were used as germline controls.
Based on retrospective analysis of data from large cooperative group studies, 40% to 50% of patients with de novo AML have normal karyotype, which is associated with an intermediate risk in terms of survival outcomes.
Thus, success in these trials may be assessed using indirect measures, such as hematologic improvement or decreased transfusion requirements and survival, without actually achieving CR.
For the European cohort, survival was measured from the date of diagnosis to the date of death or last follow-up and for the Mayo cohort from time of referral to date of death or last follow-up.
TREATMENT.
No buccal sample was available for the sole patient with a mutation in FLNB (R566Q), so this mutation could not be assumed to be somatic.
Overall Survival.
Patients with STAG2/RAD21 mutations were more likely to respond to treatment with HMAs compared with WT cases (79% vs 47%; P = .04) and were comparable in age and IPSS scores with the nonresponders.
All the authors contributed to subsequent drafts and made the decision to submit the article for publication.
The CR (including CRp) rate was significantly higher with decitabine (18% vs. 8%; P = .001).
Recent studies have also demonstrated the independent prognostic value of SETBP1 in CMML by disclosing the close associations between the mutation and higher white blood cell counts (P = 0.03), frequent extramedullary disease (P = 0.03), dismal OS (hazard ratio = 2.23, 95% CI: 1.07-4.26) (P = 0.028), and AML-free survival (hazard ratio = 2.05, 95% CI: 1.01-4.65) (P = 0.049).
The RUNX proteins are critical regulators of myeloid differentiation in all vertebrates.
Another option for this group is 1 to 2 cycles of high-dose cytarabine-based consolidation followed by autologous HSCT (category 2B).
With respect to ASXL1 mutations, Sanger sequencing indicated a burden of ~50%.
The majority of patients had improvements in symptoms, which occurred even in patients who did not have a reduction in spleen volume of 35% or more.
In this assay, mutant transduced stem cells showed lower repopulating capacity compared to mock- or wild-type U2AF35-transduced cells, as determined by the chimerism in peripheral blood 6 weeks after transplantation, indicating that both U2AF35 mutants could disturb normal hematopoiesis.
To further evaluate the efficacy and safety of ruxolitinib, we conducted the Controlled Myelofibrosis Study with Oral JAK Inhibitor Treatment I (COMFORT-I), a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving patients with intermediate-2 or high-risk myelofibrosis.
STAG2 was associated with higher-risk disease (P = .0023), and RAD21 and SMC3 defects were most frequently identified in sAML (3.5% and 4%, respectively; supplemental Figure 1).
Mutations have been identified in myeloid malignancies and have been demonstrated to dysregulate RNA splicing (Fig. 2).
Patients in both treatment arms received only 2 cycles of standard-dose cytarabine, daunorubicin, and etoposide for consolidation therapy.
Candidate genes identified were validated using 2 external validation cohorts.
The karyotype was normal.
Consonant with the genetic data showing that mutations in epigenetic modifiers occur in concert with class I and class II mutations, functional studies have revealed that perturbations of these epigenetic modifiers alone can confer self-renewal and lead to myeloid transformation.
However, this capacity for GATA factors to functionally substitute each other is limited and suggests that the cellular context in which each GATA factor is expressed is important.
Thus, azacitidine would be expected to have greater efficacy in cohesin-deficient patients.
Somatic point mutations are common in myelodysplastic syndromes and are associated with specific clinical features.
Notch1 and Gata2 are coexpressed in endothelial cells lining the floor of the aorta at E10.5, and NOTCH1 binds the Gata2 promoter and acts as an upstream regulator of Gata2 expression during the onset of definitive hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo.
GATA1 and GATA2 are essential for the development of the erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages.
Most TSG mutations are not canonical, though, making systematic clinical diagnostics more difficult.
Of note, thus far, we sequenced 463 cases of various myeloid malignancies and detected the corresponding putative ASXL1 mutation 1900_1922del (Glu635ArgfsX16) in 21 patients overall (Supplementary Table 4).
These latter showed a particularly high risk at 3 years (>30%, Figure 1C).
SETBP1 mutations.
Therefore, in vivo experiments indicate that the hematopoietic GATA factors are functionally redundant with regard to erythropoiesis, while the GATA1 protein exerts a unique function in megakaryopoiesis.
A rational bioanalytic algorithm was applied to identify candidate nonsynonymous alterations.
They hypothesized that the FOG1 antagonist activity in this process could be to some extend caused by a 'GATA switch' at the GATA2 locus.
In low-risk MDS, mutations of any 1 of these 3 genes were found in 39% of patients, and further analysis found that mutations in SF3B1 were highly associated with RARS.
In addition to the known numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities, with novel genomic sequencing technologies, approximately 80% of MDS patients have been shown to harbor somatic or acquired gene mutations.
Several key mutations are associated with distinct clinical phenotypes, which are discussed below.
All of these were found to have low JAK2 V617F allele burden when tested by quantitative assays.
Inferior predictors of survival in PMF secondary to PV and ET are similar for de novo disease, and patients may be risk stratified in a comparable manner.
The somatic or germline status of mutations in genes of the cohesin complex was established by evaluating remission samples or T cells (CD3+ CD11b- CD14- CD3+) purified from diagnostic samples by flow
The median OS among patients with FLT3-ITD in the absence of a wild-type FLT3 was only 7 months compared with 46 months among both the patient subgroups with wild-type FLT3 with or without FLT3-ITD.
Standardization.
In CMML, recent data suggest that EZH2 is a negative prognostic factor, with shorter OS, particularly in the CMML II subtype.
Further work to study the in vivo effects of conditional PRC2 loss or overexpression is crucial to advance our understanding of PRC2 function in HSCs and in myeloid leukaemogenesis.
RA with excess blasts (RAEB1 and RAEB2) cases were considered as high-risk MDS.
The Stat View (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) statistical package was used for all calculations.
As illustrated in Figures 4-5, the prognosis of a triple-negative patient is markedly worse than that of a CALR-mutant patient: in these cases, therapeutic decisions may span from a watchful waiting strategy to allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
Somatic cohesin defects were detected in 12% of patients with myeloid malignancies, whereas low expression of these genes was present in an additional 15% of patients. Mutations of cohesin genes were mutually exclusive and mostly resulted in predicted loss of function.
After secondary causes of polycythemia have been ruled out, JAK2 analysis (first for exon 14 V617F, and then, if findings are negative, for exon 12) is indicated to support the diagnosis of PV.
Thirteen patients (nos. 10-13 and 17-25) carrying N-terminal mutants resulting in frameshift and/or truncation of RUNX1 proteins in the middle of the RHD are expected to lose the ability of the RHD to bind to DNA sequences and lack transcriptional activities.
JAK2 protein kinase activity is activated by phosphorylation of its kinase domain. Activation of JAK2 induces signal transduction from both type 1 and type 2 cytokine receptors. Constitutive activation of JAK2 by either point mutation or fusion protein causes activation of the JAK/STAT pathway.
At least one mutation was present in 226 of the 439 samples (51.5%). (Missense mutations of KDM6A were found in three samples, but the mutations could not be confirmed as somatic and are not included in the totals listed above.)
The TET enzymes can also convert 5-mC to 5-formylcytosine (5-fC) and 5-carboxylcytosine (5-caC); 5-caC can be directly recognized and repaired by TDG-mediated BER (an enzymatic activity that is unable to excise 5-hmC or 5-mC).
These mutations are specific for PV and are observed in predominantly patients who are JAK2V617F negative, with an overall frequency of 3%.
Genetic counseling should also be considered for patients with GATA2 mutations because of the high clinical penetrance and poor survival rates.
The comparison of cumulative incidence curves in different groups of patients was carried out using the Pepe-Mori test, whereas the effect of quantitative covariates was estimated by applying the Fine-Gray regression model.
In addition, most of the aberrant transcripts of PTEN/MMAC1 were caused by intragenic deletions.
Based on the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) classification system, CMML is further subcategorized into CMML-1 (<5% circulating blasts and <10% BM blasts) and CMML-2 (5-19% circulating blasts, 10-19% BM blasts or when Auer rods are present irrespective of the blast count), with median overall survivals (OSs) of approximately 20 and 15 months, respectively.
However, none of these drugs have been shown to either reverse bone marrow fibrosis or induce genetic remissions and their effect on survival is uncertain.
Research has primarily focused on the prognostic implication of cytogenetics in BCR-ABL1-negative MPNs.
Swapna Thota; Aaron D. Viny; Hideki Makishima; Barbara Spitzer; Tomas Radivoyevitch; Bartlomiej Przychodzen; Mikkael A. Sekeres; Ross L. Levine; Jaroslaw P. Maciejewski.
The cohort harboring EZH2 aberrations was too small to detect a clear association with a specific French-American-British, International Prognostic Scoring System or World Health Organization classification of MDS (Table 1).
Although EZH2 mutations are sufficient to induce an MDS/MPN murine phenotype, a concomitant TET2 mutation accelerates this phenotype and leads to progressive disease.
Staining was performed in a Gene Stain Automated Gel Stainer using PlusOne Silver Staining Kit (Pharmacia Biotech).
Only the mutation R396Q in P1 has been described previously in 1 case of MonoMAC syndrome.
Table 4. Methods in Detecting JAK2 Mutations.
At the opposite, triple-negative patients had higher incidence of leukemic transformation compared with either CALR-mutant or JAK2-mutant patients.
Over the past 10 years, significant advances have been made in our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of MDS and other myelodysplasias, including chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) and atypical chronic myeloid leukemia, through identification of common gene mutations found in these neoplasms.
This subclonal architecture occurs in the setting of cooccurring genetic and molecular abnormalities, including mutations in chromatin modifiers (ASXL1) and key transcriptional regulators (RUNX1, Ras family genes, and BCOR).
Mutations in a subset of epigenetic regulators, including TET2, ASXL1 and DNMT3A, are associated with poor overall survival; as such, these mutant alleles define a subset of high-risk leukaemia that is in need of novel, mechanism-based therapies.
In univariate analysis, CALR-mutant patients had a better OS than JAK2-mutant (hazard ratio [HR] 2.3, P <.001), MPL-mutant (HR 2.6, P = .009), and triple-negative patients (HR 6.2, P <.001).
In the previously discussed SWOG/ECOG trial, the 5-year survival rates (from time of CR) for patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetics were 36% for the autologous HSCT group (n = 37; 59% underwent HSCT) and 52% for the allogeneic HSCT group (n = 47; 66% underwent HSCT).
To assess the prevalence of EZH2 mutations in individuals with MDS, we sequenced the gene in all 102 subjects from the initial cohort and in 24 additional individuals with MDS (Supplementary Table 1).
A DNA binding defective form of SCL maintains its association with a subset of active GATA elements, indicating that GATA1 is a key determinant for SCL recruitment.
Moreover, screening of whole exome sequencing results for AML available through the Cancer Genome Atlas showed the presence of mutations in genes encoding other components of the spliceosome, including mutations in HCFC1 (P72L), SAP130 (T247I), SRSF6 (W123S), SON (M1024V), and U2AF26 (C116X; supplemental Figure 1).
Overall, the response rates for INF-alpha are promising but remain comparable with those already achieved by hydroxyurea.
Median survival is estimated at <6 years with causes of death, including leukemic transformation, progressive cachexia, vascular events and infections.
Allelic Losses of PTEN/MMAC1 Gene Characterized by Loss of Heterozygosity Analysis
In this review, we describe all novel key mutations in MDS and their significance in pathophysiology and clinical practice.
Fourteen months after the transplantation, no severe infection was noted and immunologic recovery was obtained.
Management of AML in Patients Older Than 60 Years.
These supportive care measures are tailored to address the specific needs and infection susceptibility of each individual patient.
The median follow-up of the cohort was 18 months (1-168 months).
10. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES.
Therefore, more detailed expression studies in bone marrow subfractions from individuals with MDS are warranted.
No standard of care exists for CNL or aCML.
Background.
It is particularly important to identify the gene targets of possible splicing defects.
In addition, we identified 8 deletions involving STAG2 (chromosome X) or RAD21 (chromosome 8) (supplemental Figure 3 and supplemental Table 3).
GATA2 also plays a critical role in the decision of stem cells to commit to erythroid versus myeloid lineages interacting with PU.1 and repressing its expression.
Mutations of RNA-splicing genes are the most frequently observed mutations in MDS, occurring in up to 50% of cases, the most common of which include mutations of U2AF1 (U2AF35), SRSF2 (SC35), SF3B1 (SF3B155 or SAP155), and ZRSR2 (URP).
This enhancer activity requires both WGATAR and E-box motifs.
Physicians taking care of patients with PMF are often faced with therapeutic decisions that include the indication and timing of allogeneic stem cell transplantation or investigational drug therapy.
Clinicohematological characteristics and outcome of patients with CMML and RUNX1 mutations.
There were no significant associations with cytogenetic risk groups.
MPL mutation analysis is not indicated in the consideration of PV, because no MPL mutations have been described for this entity.
In addition, 85.3% of patients whose MDS harbored an SRSF2 had at least 1 additional mutation, including RUNX1, IDH2, and ASXL1 (P < 0.001).
She had 3 children, 1 of whom developed MDS detected in the evaluation of asthenia at the age of 12 (patient number 5834; P3, III, 3).
The N- and C-ZnFs of GATA2 are encoded by exons 4 and 5, respectively.
In lower-risk MDS, IDH2 mutations were shown to co-occur with mutations in DNMT3A, ASXL1, and SRSF2 and to be an adverse prognostic factor for OS.
In addition, high-dose cytarabine, if not previously used as treatment for persistent disease at day 15, with or without anthracycline may also be considered in the salvage setting.
Assays that are not allele specific, such as melting curve analysis, offer the potential to detect rare variants, but have a significantly lower sensitivity (typically 5% to 10% mutant alleles).
They found an in-frame deletion of 6 amino acids ( 341-346, found in one case) and a L359V substitution (found in 8 cases), located in the N-ZnF and C-ZnF, respectively.
Patient population BM aspirates or blood samples were collected from 315 patients with MDS (n = 88), MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasms (MDS/MPNs; n = 66), MPN (n = 52), secondary AML (sAML; n = 54) that evolved from these conditions and primary AML (pAML; n = 55) seen at Cleveland Clinic or Nagoya University between 2003 and 2010 (Table 1).
Although clonality has been demonstrated in CNL, the majority of patients exhibit normal cytogenetics.
The samples were then sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000 that generated paired end reads of 100 nucleotides.
The MDAPS was  subsequently applied to 212 CMML patients in the Dusseldorf registry; in a univariate analysis, circulating IMC had no prognostic impact, whereas on multivariable analysis, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, BM blast count >10%, male gender, hemoglobin <12 g/dl and ALC >2.5 x 109/l were independently prognostic.
If the relapse occurs after a relatively "long" (> 12 months) period of remission, retreatment with the previously successful induction regimen is an option.
ET.
Although HSCT was associated with a significantly higher rate of nonrelapse mortality (21% vs. 3%; P < .001), the 3-year OS rate showed a survival benefit with HSCT (62% vs. 51%; P = .012).
The SRSF2 gene encodes a member of the serine/arginine-rich family critical for pre-mRNA splicing.
Survival analysis confirmed the prognostic validity of the IPSS risk recalculation in our sample set (Table 3 in the Supplementary Appendix).
The molecular basis and clinical significance of genetic mutations identified in myelodysplastic syndromes.
RESULTS.
In our study, although the G-MDAPS stratified patients into four risk categories, the Mayo prognostic model was more effective and was able to risk stratify within each of the G-MDAPS risk groups.
Overall and leukemia-free survivals were inter-independently predicted by ASXL1, SRSF2 or EZH2 mutations and ASXL1, SRSF2 and IDH1 or 2 mutations, respectively.
Among the patients who received high-dose cytarabine consolidation, the 5-year relapse-free survival rate was 78% for CBF AML, 40% for normal karyotype, and 21% for other cytogenetic categories.
The clinical value of the mutation in MDS is uncertain.
Significantly, multivariate analyses demonstrated that GATA2 overexpression was an unfavorable independent factor associated with overall survival when adjusted for age and cytogenetic prognostic group.
Unfavorable karyotype indicates any of the following: +8, -7/7q-, i(17q), inv(3), -5/5q, 12p-, or 11q23 rearrangements.
Abbreviations: ASXL1, additional sex combs 1 gene; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; SF3B1, splicing factor 3B subunit 1; SRSF2, serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2; U2AF35, U2 small-nuclear RNA auxiliary factor 1; WHO, World Health Organization.
Some of these RNAs code for key proteins involved in malignant transformation.
A recent study addressed this issue by breeding a Gata2 transgene onto a Gata1 null background whose protein levels and spatiotemporal patterns of GATA2 expression closely recapitulated those of normal GATA1.
In that way, these three factors could then maintain expression of each other in HSC after BMP4 and NOTCH1 signaling ceases.
Further work may identify additional readers of 5-hmC and evaluate the function of MBD3 in other cellular contexts.
The genes encoding RAS proteins are small GTPases involved in the regulation of cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation.
At least part of the difference is likely due to the fact that, in the Mayo Clinic study, OS was estimated from the date of diagnosis or first referral, whereas in this study it was always estimated from the date of diagnosis.
The induction therapy of AML was complicated by lung aspergillosis in 2 patients of 4 who have received this therapeutic approach, and 1 additional patient (patient number 5593) suffered from lung aspergillosis along with genital cancer.
Other methods used to detect V617F include restriction fragment length polymorphism, denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, high-resolution melting-curve analysis, pyrosequencing, and various allele-specific PCR systems with electrophoretic analysis of the products.
ASSOCIATIONS FROM THE MULTIVARIABLE SURVIVAL MODEL.
6.2. LEVELS OF GATA2 EXPRESSION DETERMINE THE FATE ALONG ERYTHROID AND MEGAKARYOCYTE DIFFERENTIATION PATHWAYS.
It has been postulated that STAG2 mutations and resultant resultant depletion of cohesin may increase RUNX1 expression, forming the basis of leukemogenesis in these patients.
Patients.
CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA) is mutated in familial AML with an autosomaldominant transmission and a high penetrance.
Some cases may still show evidence of both myeloid and lymphoid antigen expression on the leukemic cells.
A treatment decision-making algorithm for previously untreated, medically fit, elderly patients (age >= 60 years) with AML was recently developed by the German AML cooperative group.
In subject 87, one allele was deleted and the other contained a point mutation.
Treatment strategies for relapse are categorized according to patient age.
In a study of patients with MDS and chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML), mutations in TET2 were identified in CD34+ cells (which include HSCs), and some patients had more than one TET2 mutation.
As summarized in this review, only a few direct GATA2 target genes have been described, the most prominent of these being GATA2 itself.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) that do not contain the BCR-ABL1 mutation include polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
Diagnosis was confirmed at each institution according to World Health Organization classification criteria.
The role of myeloablative allogeneic HSCT is limited in older patients because of significant comorbidities; however, ongoing interest has been shown in reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) allogeneic HSCT as consolidation therapy.
Unlike the FOG1/GATA1 binding, these molecular interactions are still not fully understood.
The Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system identified 163 (72%) patients in the low-risk category, 31 (14%) in the intermediate-risk category and 32 (14%) in the high-risk category, respectively.
When dichotomized using a threshold expression of < mean - 2 standard deviations (95% confidence interval) as a cutoff value, 10% to 20% of cases showed decreased cohesin expression (Figure 5A-B).
As expected, age and IPSS risk group were strongly associated with overall survival (Table 2).
The GATA family of nuclear regulatory proteins serves as a prototype for the action of lineage-restricted transcription factors.
The latest iteration replaced the term myeloproliferative disorders with "myeloproliferative neoplasms" (MPN) and incorporated systemic mastocytosis, chronic eosinophilic leukemia-not otherwise specified, chronic neutrophilic leukemia, and MPN-unclassifiable into the existing MPD category.
If available, results of prior serial testing may be provided.
Because a relatively small number of CN-AML cases has been analyzed for BCORL1 mutations and cases of s-AML have not been investigated for BCOR mutations, it is not yet clear whether or not mutations of these two homologous genes may occur in the same clinical-genetic AML backgrounds.
Furthermore, analysis of the mutant-allele burden in samples with mutations of TET2 and other genes showed that TET2 mutations are not always present at the greatest frequency, which would be expected if they were exclusively involved in early pathogenic events (Fig. 7 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Myelopoiesis.
Our results are also different from McGlynn study and Padua study of RAS, FMS, and p53, in which the loss of FMS gene, mutation of RAS, FMS, and p53 were common in AML and myelodysplasias.
There are several reasons why blood is the preferred type of specimen, including convenience and the fact that the diagnosis of PV can in most cases be made without a bone marrow evaluation.
We investigated a family in which the mother (patient number 6227; P1, II, 4) developed at 35 years of age an AML M2 associated with myelodysplasia-related changes.
Mutations of BCOR mainly clustered with CN-AML, were virtually mutually exclusive with NPM1 and FLT3-ITD mutations and showed an association with DNMT3A and RUNX1 mutations.
Therefore, we performed exome sequencing on the AML diagnosis sample of the second son (patient number 6225).
Krebs cycle.
Dynamic DNA methylation and demethylation balance occur via 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC)-dependent active demethylation, which controls DNA replication and cancer development in mammalian cells.
To detect allelic losses, the polymorphic short tandem repeat markers used were D10S215, D10S541, D10S579, and AFM086.
Mutations in RUNX1, TP53, and NRAS were most strongly associated with severe thrombocytopenia (P<0.001 for all comparisons) and an increased proportion of bone marrow blasts (P<0.006 for all comparisons).
To determine the relative contribution of mutation status to overall survival, we generated a multivariable Cox model, using a stepwise variable-selection procedure incorporating age, sex, IPSS classification, and mutation status for the 13 most frequently mutated genes identified in this study.
If a quantitative cutoff is used to define a positive result, this value should be stated as part of the methodology summary, and a limit of sensitivity must also be included.
We compared the characteristics of the study patients with mutations, using the appropriate statistical methods, as detailed in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix.
However, due to the low frequency of the mutation, additional studies are necessary to confirm these findings.
The FERM domain, which resides at the amino terminus, functions as a binding protein transducing signals from JAK2 to other transmembrane cytokine receptors (Figure 1).
ZRSR2/URP.
More than 50% of patients in each arm had already experienced a CR when they received cycle 2.
These SCN patients harbor germ-line mutations in neutrophil elastase or other genes necessary for production of neutrophils.
Myelodysplastic syndromes are clinically heterogeneous disorders characterized by clonal hematopoiesis, impaired differentiation, peripheral-blood cytopenias, and a risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia.
In contrast, mutations of EZH2, which lies on the distal portion of chromosome 7q, were not associated with 7q deletions.
Collaboration of other genetic or epigenetic alterations in the great majority of patients with CMML and RUNX1 mutations, especially at AML transformation, requires further investigation.
During erythroid differentiation, expression of GATA1 is upregulated and GATA1 replaces GATA2 at the same motifs, resulting in the inhibition of GATA2 transcription.
One complicating issue is that the GATA2 protein is much less stable than GATA1, raising questions about the relevance of mRNA levels.
ABSTRACT.
Most mutated patients had a normal karyotype, suggesting that cohesin gene mutations do not act through destabilization of chromosomal integrity in AML, but rather alternative mechanisms such as transcriptional control.
When stratifying by normal/abnormal karyotype, no particular genetic lesion was enriched based on karyotype, although 5 out of 9 patients (55%) with RUNX1 mutations and abnormal karyotype had trisomy 8.
ABSTRACT.
Thus, transcription of GATA2 mRNAs is initiated from two first exons: the distal first exon of GATA2 (IS exon) is specific of hematopoietic and neuronal cells, whereas the proximal first exon (IG exon) is utilized in all tissues that express GATA2 (Fig. 1).
Cytokine-driven neutrophilia accompanying plasma cell neoplasms is a well-described association.
TP53 as a therapeutic target has also been investigated in del(5q) MDS.
Several methods have been used to detect JAK2 and MPL mutations.
If there is doubt, a peripheral blood or a bone marrow specimen collected at a later time point may be used to confirm the finding.
OVERVIEW.
Although there are no FDA-cleared tests, a number of methods have been developed for detecting JAK2 V617F mutation.
Survival rates were 77% (at 20 years) and 62% (at 30 years) in this series of 14 patients with GATA2 mutations (Figure 2A).
Current recommendations support the use of aspirin as first-line therapy in all risk classes unless contraindicated.
Reductions in spleen volume were durable; 67.0% of patients with a response had this response for 48 weeks or longer with continued therapy.
Together, except for the two patients carrying biallelic heterozygous mutations, the remaining were monoallelic heterozygous mutations.
Transformation to AML occurred in 2 patients in this study; both patients received ruxolitinib and had baseline characteristics that placed them at increased risk for transformation.
GATA2 transcription is regulated by several transcription factors such as ETS1, BMP4, NOTCH1, PU.1 and EVI1, and by the cytokines IL-1 and TNFalpha.
On a univariate analysis, factors adversely influencing OS included high WBC (P<0.0001), high absolute neutrophil count (P = 0.0005), high ALC (P = 0.005), high AMC (P<0.0001), low platelet count (P = 0.012), presence of circulating IMC (P<0.0001), PB blasts (P = 0.002), BM blasts (P = 0.005), BM cellularity (P = 0.01), WHO morphological categories (P = 0.02), MDAPS (P<0.0001), G-MDAPS (P = 0.01) and the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system (P = 0.04) (Table 3).
At least 18 clones were subsequently sequenced.
As seen from the earlier discussions, patients with NK-AML may present with multiple molecular lesions.
GATA1 is present in the more differentiated cells of the erythroid, megakaryocytic, eosinophilic and mast lineages, and is an essential transcription factor for the maturation of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells.
The most relevant question, both biologically and clinically, is which other gene mutations are associated with the mutation status of individual spliceosomal genes.
GATA2 is expressed in adult endothelial cells, where it plays key roles in the transcriptional regulation of endothelial-specific genes containing GATA-binding sites in their promoter regions: eNOS, von Willebrand factor, KDR and PECAM.
The interaction between the TP53 mutations and the genes more recently reported to be mutated in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes have not been studied in a large enough number of patients to establish their independent prognostic significance.
Another recent study also showed that in younger patients (age < 60 years) with NK-AML, DNMT3A mutation was associated with significantly decreased DFS (3-year rate, 20% vs. 49%; P = .007) and a trend toward decreased OS.
In this study, samples with abnormal sequencing results were subjected to repeated analyses by DNA PCR using alternative primer pairs to confirm the presence of unequivocal mutations.
The majority of abnormalities in PV were associated with age >=60 years.
Treatment with antimetabolites, such as the purine analog fludarabine, has also been associated with therapy-related MDS/AML in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders, particularly when administered in combination with alkylating agents.
Allogeneic HSCT in first CR was associated with a significantly lower 3-year cumulative relapse rate (22% vs. 62%; P < .001) and higher 3-year relapse-free survival rate (56% vs. 29%; P < .001) compared with the non-HSCT group.
This splicing abnormality of RUNX1 is also observed in cases with SRSF2 mutations but not in SF3B1 mutants.
In the context of hematopoiesis, available data demonstrate that either quantitative or qualitative dysfunction of GATA hematopoietic factors contribute to the malignant phenotype of several types of leukemias.
GATA2 mutations are identified in chronic neutropenia.
Careful analysis of the methylome in HSCs revealed that deletion of Dnmt3a resulted in both hypermethylation and hypomethylation of different loci; notably, they observed hypomethylation and increased expression of a core set of genes that are crucial for regulating HSC self-renewal and promoting malignancy.
One control had a deletion of nucleotides (nt) 1064 through 1814, the others had deletion of nt 1180-2142, nt 1244-1526, nt 1296-2013, and nt 1835-1877.
The second objective focuses on patient-specific factors, including assessment of comorbid conditions, which may affect an individual's ability to tolerate chemotherapy.
A screening assay may be warranted in patients with thrombocytosis >1000 x 109/L because the risk of acquired von Willebrand syndrome increases with increasing platelets levels.
In AML, the BCOR gene is targeted by both translocations and mutations.
Conditioning regimes and graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis was variable, and significant differences were not found between protocols.
However, we found several specific genes in which the splicing pattern was altered.
Chromosomal abnormalities were described according to the International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature.
Because of the decreased probability of achieving remission through induction chemotherapy, transplantation without induction chemotherapy may be considered for patients with antecedent myelodysplasia or treatment-related leukemia who have an available sibling donor and who have a relatively low percentage of marrow involvement.
Furthermore, GATA2 directly upregulates BMP4 expression, binding to the regulatory elements present at the BMP4 promoter.
At several points during the course of treatment, response is assessed based on bone marrow morphology and cytogenetic and molecular responses (see pages 997 and 998 for definitions of complete and partial response and disease relapse).
Cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities associated with cohesin defects.
RT-PCR and cDNA Sequencing.
At both the 3' and 5' splice sites of RUNX1 intron 6, unspliced reads were more frequent than spliced reads (Figure 3B).
She died from CMV pneumonia without achieving complete remission.
Adverse effects may be attenuated with prophylactic cytoreduction when using hydroxyurea.
Table 1. Baseline Characteristics of the Patients.
The PTEN/MMAC1 protein is a dual-specificity phosphatase containing a protein tyrosine phosphatases catalytic domain and a region homology with the cytoskeletal proteins tensin and auxillin.
A recent in vitro study showed that loss of BAP1, a tumor suppressor gene, is linked to myeloid neoplasm by loss of interacting with the polycomb group proteins ASXL1 and ASXL2, as well as host cell factor-1 and O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferase, which could provide an alternative mechanism in dysregulation of epigenesis.
Fig. 4. A model for human erythroid and megakaryocyte development. (A) Scheme outlining the early stages of maturation of erythroid differentiation.  Important transcriptional and signaling regulators that are required for the initial stages of erythropoiesis are indicated (inside grey boxes).  Transcription factors and activation of signaling proteins aberrantly expressed in human and/or murine erythroleukemia are highlighted in red. (B) Megakaryocyte maturation proceeds in an ordered manner from the BFU-Mk through proplatelet-producing cells.  Important transcriptional and signaling regulators that are required for the initial stages of megakaryopoiesis are also indicated (inside grey boxes).  Genes aberrantly expressed in human megakaryocytic disorders are highlighted in red.
Table 1. Features of the BCOR and BCORL1 transcriptional corepressors.
When considering the otherwise favorable prognostic group of patients with mutated NPM1, but wild-type FLT3, no significant difference for OS and RFS between patients with our without mutations in the cohesin complex was identified (OS: HR 0.65; 95% CI, 0.2-2.14; P = .48; supplemental Figure 3E) and (RFS: HR 0.32; 95% CI, 0.07-1.39; P = .13; supplemental Figure 3F).
The biological functions of GATA2 in hematopoiesis and the importance of its balanced expression led to the suggestion that it might be involved in leukemogenesis.
Although allele burden has been shown to decrease after use of some inhibitors, there is no one-to-one correlation of allele burden with clinical response (eg, reduction in splenomegaly).
A 1-muL aliquot of cDNA was used for the first PCR amplification for 30 cycles, using primers, M1u and M1d.
The resulting risk categories were very low (score = 0), low (score = 1), intermediate (score 2 or 3), high (score 4 or 5), and very high (score >=6).
Statistical analyses were carried out using an SPSS software version 8.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
This study showed similar rates of 4-year nonrelapse mortality (19% and 20%, respectively), and no difference was seen in relapse and OS rates.
As reported by Ernst et al EZH2 mutations were identified in 13% of CMML patients and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm patients mutated in EZH2 had been associated with an inferior outcome (P = 0.0006).
The effect of these modifications most often involves variations in the transcriptional activity due to changes in nuclear localization, DNA-binding, protein stability, and/or cofactor recruitment.
Traditional Sanger sequencing has been used extensively, but it has relatively poor sensitivity.
Also in the Mayo cohort ASXL1 and SRSF2 mutations were more enriched in the DIPSS-plus high-risk category (45%, P = 0.0002 and 22%, P = 0.004, respectively), with no difference for EZH2 mutations.
Most of the mutations we detected were heterozygous, indicating that homozygous mutations may lead to cell death or that some of the functional consequences are related to dominant negative effects.
Using these four independent risk factors, we prepared a new prognostic risk model consisting of three risk categories: low risk (0 risk factors), intermediate risk (one risk factor) and high risk (two or more risk factors), with median survivals of 32, 18.5 and 10 months, respectively (Figure 2).
In the majority of affected individuals, a cure for the disease cannot be achieved, and most die from severe cytopenias.
Notwithstanding case reports of JAK2 V617F positivity in selected cases of CNL and aCML, no other recurrent genetic mutations had been identified in these diseases until the recent discoveries of mutant SETBP1 and CSF3R.
We recently reported that ~50% to 60% of patients with CNL or aCML harbor mutations in the receptor for colony-stimulating factor 3 (CSF3R; GCSFR).
They were also more likely to be assigned higher risk scores based on the MDAPS and the G-MDAPS.
No homozygous mutations have been reported for these three genes.
Mutational analysis was performed on bone marrow samples by direct sequencing of all reverse transcription PCR products amplified with three primer pairs that cover the entire coding sequences of RUNX1b.
Other potential prognostic biomarkers in PMF include nullizygosity for JAK2 46/1 haplotype, low JAK2V617F allele burden, increased serum IL-8 and IL-2R levels and excess serum-free light chain levels.
The regimens represent purine analog (eg, fludarabine, cladribine, clofarabine)-containing regimens, which have shown remission rates of 30% to 45% in several clinical trials, and those that have been used as the comparator arms in U.S. cooperative group trials in the past decade.
For patients with RUNX1 mutations, no significant difference was observed between the locations of mutations (N-terminal vs C-terminal) or between the patterns of mutations (missense vs frameshift/nonsense) with respect to the clinicohematological features, overall survival or time to AML transformation (Supplementary Table 2).
Notably, germline cohesin mutations in NIBPL, SMC1A, SMC3, and HDAC8 occur in patients with Cornelia deLange syndrome, hallmarked by craniofacial abnormalities and cognitive deficits.
The prognostic significance of some mutations in myelodysplastic syndromes has been described, but prior studies have generally examined small sample sets, have involved limited analyses of one or a small number of genes, or have focused exclusively on a particular subtype of myelodysplastic syndrome.
Because of their distinct biological and clinical features, "AML with mutated NPM1" and "AML with mutated CEBPA" are already recognized as provisional entities in the 2008 WHO classification.
What Are the Needs for Standardization and Proficiency Testing?
BCR-ABL1-Negative Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: A Review of Molecular Biology, Diagnosis, and Treatment.
This suggests that DNMT3A mutations may be an early event of clonal evolution.
In recent years, a number of somatic mutations have been associated with various myeloid malignancies, including MDS.
GATA1 and GATA2 regulate the expression of a number of erythroid genes, and proper regulation of these genes is critical for the maintenance of erythroid homeostasis.
It is thus possible that functionally decreased expression may produce a clinical phenocopy of cohesin mutations.
The role of TET2 in MPN was established while investigating a chromosomal rearrangement at locus 4q24 previously described in patients with AML and MDS.
This consolidation therapy is based on a CALGB trial comparing 100 mg/m2, 400 mg/m2, and 3 g/m2 doses of cytarabine.
This latter observation generated the hypothesis of genetic "predestination," in which early driver mutations dictate future trajectories of subclonal evolution with distinct clinical outcomes.
Moreover, recent studies have found that several class I and class II alterations that are central to the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies have direct epigenetic functions in addition to their canonical roles in promoting haematopoietic cell proliferation.
This phosphorylation results in reduced binding of heterochromatin protein 1alpha (HP1alpha), a chromatin-binding protein that leads to transcriptional silencing (FIG. 3).
The karyotype identified a trisomy 11 and a partial deletion of chromosome 7.
BAALC expression was lower in patients with a mutation compared with patients without a mutation in a gene of the cohesin complex (P = .033) (Table 1).
Genotyping STR analysis demonstrated that the chromosome 3 allele bearing the GATA2 R396Q mutation came from the maternal grandfather, although the mutation was not detected in his DNA sample (supplemental Figure 2), suggesting a de novo event in patient II-4 (patient number 6227).
We also observed a subset of AML patients with marked reduction in STAG2 and PDS5B expression in the absence of cohesin mutation.
These regimens are based on a backbone of cytarabine and an anthracycline, and have changed little in the past 25 years.
It is not clear whether BAP1 or ASXL1 mutations lead to alterations in H2AK119 ubiquitylation in vivo.
Therapy has primarily consisted of hydroxyurea or other oral chemotherapeutics, as well as interferon-a.
At a median follow-up of 15 months, 166 (73%) deaths and 33 (14.5%) leukemic transformations were documented.
MPL mutations were less frequent (0.7% versus 12%; P<0.001) in JAK2V617F-mutated patients; IDH1 and IDH2 mutations, which were mutually exclusive, were more frequent in DNMT3A-(27% versus 5%; P = 0.001) or SRSF2-(36% versus 7%; P<0.001) mutated patients.
Examination of the blood and the BM revealed a refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia.
Set binding protein (SETBP1) interacts with SET, a negative regulator of the tumor suppressor protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A).
In addition, the WHO classification system allows AML to be diagnosed regardless of the percentage of marrow blasts in patients with abnormal hematopoiesis and characteristic clonal structural cytogenetic abnormalities with t(15;17), t(8;21), and inv(16) or t(16;16).
In U2AF35, the mutations almost exclusively involved highly conserved two amino acid positions, S34 and Q157, within the N- and C-terminal zinc finger domains, while almost all SRSF2 mutations are missense changes at P95 or deletions involving this amino acid position.
The above difference in risk of thrombosis remained statistically significant after adjusting for age.
PTEN/MMAC1 is a putative tumor suppressor gene recently identified at chromosome 10q23.3, which contains 9 exons and encodes a 403 amino acid protein.
Our results in the whole cohort of 310 patients with MDS were generally consistent with those studies.
Clinically, ASXL1 mutations appear to be broadly adverse across many myeloid malignancies.
EZH2 mutations constitute a novel poor prognostic risk group and, moreover, had the strongest clinical impact of all markers analyzed thus far.
The probability of 5-year disease-free survival was 33%, 22%, and 27%, respectively.
Recent genomic studies have identified novel recurrent somatic mutations in patients with myeloid malignancies, including myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
[END OF ABSTRACT].
One-hundred and ninetyone patients (84%) had CMML-1 with a median OS of 21 months, whereas 35 patients had CMML-2 with a median OS of 15 months.
Genomic DNA was extracted from BM or peripheral blood with the use of standard methods and subjected agarose gel and optical density ratio tests to confirm the purity and concentration before Covaris fragmentation.
No recurrent deletion, amplification, or uniparental disomy was detected by CGH (data not shown).
In this study, trisomy 13 or trisomy 21 was only present in one each of those harboring RUNX1 mutations, whereas they were not detected in mutation-negative patients.
The spectrum of infections associated with GATA2-deficient neutropenic patients encompasses bacterial and fungal infection with frequent skin or mucosal involvements and a higher risk of mycobacterial and viral infections, reflecting either the profound deficit of NK cells in MonoMAC syndrome or the importance of the cooperation between neutrophils and NK cells.
However, there is only one study reporting the prevalence of the GATA2 high expression in AML, performed by single-round RT-PCR.
Epigenetic modifications have long been known to govern genetic programming and cellular differentiation.
An interesting finding was the strong association between NPM1 mutations and the mutations in cohesin genes, as already indicated in the recent report of the Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.
Cytogenetic and molecular lesions are the most significant prognostic indicators, with failure to achieve remission after 1 cycle of induction therapy and tumor burden (WBC >= 100,000/mcL) included as poor-risk factors for long-term remission.
Concluding remarks.
The protocol was approved by the institutional review board at each participating site.
Such mutations may lead to distinct phenotypes and, because there is effect on survival, their detection may have future diagnostic utility.
Interestingly, small-molecule inhibitors of IDH mutants have been developed and are used in clinical trials for AML patients harboring these mutations.
In this large cohort study, the prognostic value of such gene rearrangement in MDS was unable to be determined.
An alternative strategy for patients with antecedent myelodysplasia who have not received a hypomethylating agent would be a trial of either decitabine or azacytidine while a rapid donor search is initiated.
Mutations have been identified in R172 and R140 of the IDH2 gene, with R140 mutation occurring more frequently.
Within "lower-risk" subjects (Figure 5A), CALR-mutant patients had a better OS compared with either JAK2 (V617F)-mutant (P = .011) or triple-negative patients (P <.001).
Patients with SNP-A lesions concordant with metaphase cytogenetics or typical lesions known to be recurrent required no further analysis.
Because most laboratories offer V617F and exon 12 mutations as separate tests, exon 12 mutation may be mistakenly requested as the initial screening test instead of V617F mutation.
As such, elucidating the impact of epigenetic mutations on leukaemogenesis and therapeutic response will be essential for advancing our understanding and treatment of myeloid malignancies.
Due to the strong association between NPM1 mutations and mutations in the cohesin complex, we studied the impact of cohesin mutations on OS and RFS in NPM1-mutated AML patients separately.
Recurrent mutations in JAK2 and MPL genes are genetic hallmarks of BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.
With quantitative assessment, it has been reported that approximately 20% to 30% of PV patients have less than 25% JAK2 V617F alleles.
Malcovati et al reported that regardless of disease type, SF3B1 mutations strongly predicted the presence of increased sideroblasts with 97.7 % positive predictive value, although it did not necessarily satisfy the criteria for RARS or RCMD-RS (i.e., 15 % of all erythroblasts).
Preclinical studies have clearly shown that the development of MDS is derived from acquired genetic mutations independent of their phenotypic or morphologic presentation.
We found that several of these genetic lesions correlate strongly with features of the clinical phenotype, including specific cytopenias, blast percentage, cytogenetic abnormalities, and overall survival.
Notably, expression of the entire cohesin complex was reduced in patients with STAG2 mutations in a manner similar to that seen in patients with reduced cohesin expression in the absence of mutations (Figure 6B).
No difference was seen in relapse rate, EFS, or OS outcomes between the treatment arms.
A recent study provided evidence of mutated CBL in enhancement of resistance to apoptosis in juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia via Src family kinase lyn-PI3K/AKT pathway, suggesting a potential therapeutic strategy by using a Lyn-PI3K/AKT inhibitor to treat the chemoresistant CBL-mutant juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia or assumedly in CBL-mutated MDS.
Interestingly, all mutations were mutually exclusive among each other.
These mutations block the expression of the full-length protein, but allow for expression of a shorter isoform named GATA1s, which retains the two ZnF and lacks the transactivation domain.
The improvement was rapid and was maintained over the 24-week period during which symptom data were collected (Fig. 2A).
According to the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) diagnostic criteria for CNL, the leukocytosis is >=25 x 109/L; >80% of leukocytes are segmented neutrophils/band forms; and <10% are immature granulocytes.
The extended cohort of patients was used to identify phenotype/genotype associations (supplemental Table 2).
Perhaps additional emphasis should be placed on understanding the pathogenicity of these diseases to gain insight in other potential therapies.
The representative regimens included are: 1) cladribine, cytarabine, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), with or without mitoxantrone or idarubicin; 2) fludarabine, cytarabine, and G-CSF (FLAG regimen) with or without idarubicin; 3) etoposide and cytarabine, with or without mitoxantrone; or 4) clofarabine, cytarabine and G-CSF.
The EZH2 homologue EZH1 also has similar enzymatic activity, and the redundancy of these two proteins in controlling PRC2 functionality probably differs according to cellular context.
Germline heterozygous mutations of RUNX1 occur mostly in the Rel homology domain, leading to the loss of its DNA-binding capacity and being associated with a familial platelet disorder and an autosomaldominant transmission.
Both IPSS and DIPSS use five adverse factors, including age >65 years, hemoglobin <10 g/dl, leukocyte count >25 x 109/l, circulating blasts >=1% and presence of constitutional symptoms, in order to distinguish among low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2 and high-risk patients with respective median survivals of 11.3, 7.9, 4.0 and 2.3 years, per IPSS, or not reached, 14.2, 4.0 and 1.5 years, per DIPSS.
This study showed for the first time a high frequency of RUNX1 mutations in CMML.
The patient died 5 years later from an H1N1 influenza infection in complete remission.
In principle, the presence of additional exon 14 mutations can interfere with binding of primers and probes in allele-specific assays, but such mutations are exceptionally rare (<1% of all JAK2 mutations).
Recent studies found SETBP1 mutations in up to 9% of all MDS/MPN patients, with especially high frequency (24-31.7%) in atypical CML.
S5A and S5B in the Supplementary Appendix).
For patients who are deemed unfit for standard induction or intermediate-intensity therapy such as clofarabine, recent options have focused on epigenetic agents, including hypomethylating drugs such as 5-azacytadine and decitabine, alone or in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitors.
MPL was identified as a candidate for MPN pathogenesis when it was described in the downstream signaling pathway required for JAK2V617F-mediated transformation of myeloprogenitor cells.
Blood versus Bone Marrow Initial testing of JAK2 and MPL mutations is most commonly performed on peripheral blood samples.
The mean coverage for cohesin genes (STAG2, SMC3, and RAD21) is 265X for the deepsequencing samples.
CSF3R mutations.
Therefore, it is important for physicians to submit sufficient samples to reserve aliquots of cryopreserved marrow from the time of diagnosis to allow for molecular diagnostic tests in patients with normal karyotype.
Patients who received ruxolitinib had weight gain, whereas those receiving placebo had weight loss (Fig.
During the past 3 to 5 years, "normal" cytogenetics have been shown to encompass several molecular lesions with divergent risk behaviors.
The limited experience with induction-type chemotherapy for blastic transformation is generally poor with death related to resistant disease or regimen-related toxicities.
The immunologic standard evaluation, even though it was not systemically performed, revealed mild abnormalities (supplemental Table 2).
There are few studies about the role of miRNAs in GATA2.
The high frequency with which cohesin mutations occur in myeloid disease and their presence in expanding subclones during disease progression suggests that the cohesin complex may represent an attractive therapeutic target for future preclinical and clinical studies.
According to recent large cohort studies of MDS patients, 72-90% of cases carried at least one mutation (average of 3/per case).
Because the OS outcomes for the high-dose arm in the SWOG trial (high-dose cytarabine induction and 2 cycles of high-dose cytarabine consolidation; 4-year OS rate of 52% for patients age < 50 years) is comparable to those of the CALGB trial with standard-dose infusional cytarabine induction and 4 cycles of high-dose cytarabine consolidation (4year OS rate of 52% for patients age <= 60 years), the use of high-dose cytarabine in the induction phase outside of a clinical trial remains controversial.
PCR amplification conditions were the same for both U2AF35 reactions and included a primary denaturation of 95--Degree--C for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of: 95--Degree--C for 30 s, 57--Degree--C for 45 s and 72--Degree--C for 45 s, and ended with a final extension of 72--Degree--C for 5 min.
Among patients with MDS/MPN, SF3B1 mutations were not common in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), but they were frequent in patients with RARS-T; thus, the presence of RS was found to correlate highly with SF3B1 mutations, irrespective of other clinical or morphologic features (Figure 2A).
ABSTRACT.
It is also known that the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1 and TNFalpha activate GATA2, leading to the inhibition of erythroid differentiation in human erythropoietin-dependent cells.
Figure 1. Impact on OS of SRSF2, ASXL1, SF3B1 and V2AK35 mutations in patients with CMML.
Practice guidelines also serve to identify questions and suggest areas for future development.
He had a previous history of recurrent infections and mild neutropenia.
This complex initiates dimethylation and trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27), an epigenetic modification associated with gene silencing.
Zhang et al described two GATA2 mutations in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis.
The investigations revealed no further significant associations, with the exception of EZH2-mutated versus EZH2 wild-type cases (Supplementary Table 5).
Sample preparations and hybridizations were performed using Genome-wide Human SNP Nsp/Sty and CytoScan assay kits (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer's protocol.
DISCUSSION.
The oncogenic role of mutant JAK2V617F tyrosine kinase in patients with BCR-ABL1-negative MPN has not been fully established.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS.
Informed consent for sample collection was obtained according to protocols approved by the institutional review boards and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Cytogenetic and molecular analysis.
A post hoc analysis showed that patients who received ruxolitinib had improvement in each individual symptom assessed on the MFSAF (Fig. 2C), whereas symptoms worsened in the placebo group (P<0.01 for all comparisons with placebo).
The proportion of patients with a reduction of 50% or more in the total symptom score from baseline to week 24, a prespecified secondary end point, was significantly higher in the ruxolitinib group than in the placebo group (45.9% vs. 5.3%; odds ratio, 15.3; 95% CI, 6.9 to 33.7; P<0.001).
In median, the burden of EZH2 mutations was 45% of bidirectional sequencing reads (range: 1.4-88%) per patient.
When GATA1 is reestablished, GATA1 replaces GATA2 at the PU.1 locus, and PU.1 expression is extinguished.
Patients treated in the high-dose cytarabine arm received a second high-dose cycle for consolidation, whereas patients in the standard-dose arm were randomized to receive consolidation therapy with either 2 cycles of standard-dose cytarabine or 1 cycle of high-dose cytarabine plus daunorubicin.
Although such testing is still not standard for diagnosing MPNs, the findings from the sample exchange study provide hope that quantitative testing will be reliable when such testing becomes standard practice.
Only 3 of these mutations (L359V, T354M, and M355del) have been functionally tested by gel-shift or luciferase assays.
Mutations in the cohesin-complex have already been described in colorectal cancer, and there has been a link between these mutations and chromosomal instability.
Significant covariates were dichotomized at their medians, and resulting 2-group log-rank test differences were visualized using Kaplan-Meier methods.
S9A and S9B in the Supplementary Appendix).
Alternatively, these mutations may modulate the ability of class I and class II alterations to alter the methylation and/or chromatin state and to contribute to leukaemogenesis.
Analysis for mutational burden after therapy demonstrated the STAG2 and SMC3 mutant clones in 2 cases were undetectable and the third case had persistence of a small RAD21 clone (44% to 7%).
Preanalytic components should include the tissue source (eg, peripheral blood, bone marrow, paraffin-embedded tissue) and, if available, the clinical indication for testing.
Taken together, our results indicate that GATA2 overexpression could be a useful molecular marker for predicting clinical outcome in AML, and would support the association between GATA2 and both WT1 and EVI1 previously reported.
KEY POINTS.
Of note, DNA methylation and direct DNA and DNA-associated histone modification represent critical mechanisms of altered epigenetic regulation in MDS (Fig. 1).
Imagawa et al demonstrated that GATA2 inhibits EPO transcription by binding to its promoter under normoxic conditions.
Nucleotide positions are determined based on the cited sources.
At 20 years of age, he underwent HSCT with an unrelated donor.
With less common mutations, it is not clear what level of analytical sensitivity is needed.
The observation that about half the BCOR-mutated cases also carry mutations of the DNMT3A gene suggests that these two mutations may act synergistically to induce AML, possibly interfering with epigenetic mechanisms.
These co-factors include the C-terminal binding protein (CtBP) and the NuRD chromatin remodelling complex.
Patients.
Statistical analysis.
Multivariable analyses of factors predicting progression to AML were also performed within the framework of competing risks by the sub-hazard regression method.
The first PCR products were 1476 bp in length, and the length of nested PCR products was 1344 bp. Of the 62 AML specimens analyzed, 15 (24%) revealed the occurrence of aberrant PTEN/MMAC1 transcripts; a normalsized band was present in all specimens (Fig. 1A).
Figure 2. Clinical evolution. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curve of GATA2-mutated patients. Confidence intervals of 95% are indicated. (B) Evolution of GATA2-mutated patients to MDS or AML from birth to evolution to MDS or AML or last follow-up. Confidence intervals of 95% are indicated.
Of 5 STAG2 and SMC3 mutated patients, 3 carried a mutation in NPM1, respectively.
Given that IDH mutations lead to a gain-of-function mutation, it may be possible to design small-molecule inhibitors that specifically block the synthesis of 2-HG, with therapeutic response monitored through serum 2-HG levels and epigenetic patterning.
Management of AML.
Fig. 1. After the recognition of the 50 splice site by U1 snRNP complex, a protein complex consisting of a U2AF heterodimer, ZRSR2 and SRSF1/2 was recruited to the 30 splice boundary, where the smaller subunit (U2AF35) of the U2AF heterodimer binds to the AG-dinucleotide, while the larger subunits recognize a polypyrimidine tract. SRSF1 and SRSF2 belong to a SR family of proteins, having one or more Serine-Arginine-rich domains, and bind to splicing enhancer sequences and also interact with other proteins through its SR domain. To the 50 upstream of the polypyrimidine tract lies a branchpoint sequence, to which another splicing factor, SF-1, binds and together with the U2AF heterodimer and other components, participates in the establishment of the splicing E complex. Once the splicing E complex is established, a U2 snRNP complex replaces SF-1 to generate the splicing A complex. Prominently, all the major components of these splicing complex are targets of gene mutations in MDS.
ABSTRACT.
Oligonucleotide primers for amplification of exons 1-9 of PTEN/MMAC1 are shown in Table I.
We have performed deep sequencing of mRNA in hematopoietic cells derived from mutant cases and compared the results obtained in cells with a corresponding WT form of the gene.
In the presence of functional spliceosomal machinery, sequencing reads are expected not to cross the intron/exon boundaries and therefore should not contain any intronic sequences.
In fact, mutation of a subset of lysine residues causes a severe loss of the transactivation potential of GATA2 protein.
As EZH2, ASXL1 and SRSF2 mutations predicted overall survival, while ASXL1, SRSF2 and IDH1 or IDH2 predicted leukemic transformation, all independent of each other, we considered the four mutations (ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH1/2) as being detrimental for disease outcome, in general, and accordingly classified the European patients into those who displayed at least one ('mutationally high-risk') or none ('mutationally low-risk') of the four mutations.
All mutations were detected by bidirectional sequencing and scored as pathogenic if not present in nonclonal paired CD3-derived DNA.
Figure 2. Cooccurring somatic mutations in cohesin mutant patients. (A) Mutually exclusive cohesin gene mutations and cooccurring somatic genetic events. (B) Somatic mutational correlation in cohesin mutant/deletion cases.
Mutations are numbered as recommended by the Human Genome Variation Society (http://www.hgvs.org/) using the reference sequence NM_032638.4.
Mayo Clinic cohort.
Table 2. Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression analysis of driver mutations (JAK2, CALR, and MPL) and IPSS variables evaluated as risk factors for survival in patients with PMF.
The predictive model was subsequently validated in an independent cohort of elderly patients (N = 801) treated with 2 courses of induction therapy with cytarabine and daunorubicin.
Despite the importance of BMI1 in the regulation of stem cell self-renewal, recurrent somatic mutations in PRC1 members have not been described thus far in haematopoietic malignancies.
Taken together, the above features conform to those of loss-of-function mutations in a tumor-suppressor gene.
RESULTS.
Mutations in IDH1 have been reported in 6% to 9% of AML cases, with a higher frequency reported among patients with NK-AML (8%-16%).
A series of normal DNA samples should be analyzed to derive the threshold for a positive result.
Although allogeneic stem-cell transplantation may cure myelofibrosis, few patients are eligible for this treatment.
The core proteins responsible for this pathway form the spliceosome complex (Fig. 2).
RESULTS.
Sequencing results containing mutations were repeated using DNA samples.
The quality and quantity and the size distribution of the Illumina libraries were determined with an Agilent Bioanalyzer.
Expression of this enzyme has been reported to be reciprocal to the levels of UCK, a rate-limiting enzyme for azacitidine metabolism.
Our comprehension of the biological consequences of these epigenetic changes is still at a nascent stage.
This pathway leads to the conversion of 5-hmC to 5-hydroxymethyluracil (5-hmU), which activates the base-excision repair (BER) pathway that uses the thymine  DNA glycosylase (TDG) or the single-strand-selective monofunctional uracil DNA glycosylase (SMUG1) to generate unmethylated cytosines.
Figure 5. Gene expression profile was analyzed in CD34+ cells purified from mutationally high-risk (n=9) and low-risk (n=11) patients randomly selected in the European cohort. The heat map was computed on the gene list provided in Supplementary Table 4 using the clustering algorithm included in the Partek GS package (Partek Incorporated, St Louis, MO, USA) by means of euclidean distance and average linkage. Gene coloring is based on normalized signals, as shown at the bottom of the figure; green indicates reduced expression, red increased expression. Gene symbol is indicated on the left. Low-risk and high-risk groups clustered separately in the dendrogram shown at the top of the heat map.
Although splenic irradiation and splenectomy may provide transient palliation of symptomatic splenomegaly, the latter has been associated with anecdotal worsening of neutrophilic leukocytosis in CNL.
All other sequence variants were confirmed to be somatic by sequencing paired flow-sorted CD3+ cells.
All mutations were heterozygous apart from STAG2 and SMC1A mutations in male patients, as both genes are X-linked.
Although complex karyotype (having >= 3 clonal cytogenetic abnormalities) and -5 or -7 monosomies are categorized in the high-risk/unfavorable cytogenetics group, the presence of a monosomal karyotype was found to confer further negative prognostic influence within the high-risk group.
Of the 15 cases that showed aberrant transcripts, 12 cases displayed one abnormal transcript and 3 had two abnormal transcripts (Fig. 1A).
Although there is substantial interest in these technologies, nonetheless there are limitations, especially regarding sensitivity.
A total of 66 specimens were shared among the 22 laboratories that participated (18 in the United States, 2 in Canada, and 2 in Asia).
MPL mutation detection was compared among the four participating laboratories.
Instead, a better molecular characterization of MDS on the genomic, epigenetic, and genetic levels probably more objectively diagnoses conditions, determines patients' prognosis and, based on the underlying molecular defects, directs the application of targeted therapies.
The median age of this cohort was 70 years (range 30-90); 185 (69%) were male and 227 (85%) patients met the 2008 WHO criteria for CMML-1.
To differentiate polymorphisms from somatic mutations, we studied T-cells purified from diagnostic samples by flow cytometry.
Blood and medullar tests revealed a mild neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, B-cell deficiencies, and a very slightly hypoplastic BM with a normal karyotype.
The proteins of this family are critical for the hydroxylation of methylated cytosine residues.
Overall, the main clinical features identified in these patients are the presence of warts at the initial diagnosis, frequent infections, and evolution to MDS and/or AML.
Among a total of 29 patients, 8 of 9 CNL (89%) and 8 of 20 aCML (40%) cases exhibited CSF3R mutations.
We included commonly used prognostic scoring systems such as MDAPS, G-MDAPS and the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system.
Functional studies are needed to investigate this and the potential effects of GATA2 mutations on dysfunction of the CXCR4 pathway, which account for the panleukopenia of WHIM patients.
The advantages and disadvantages of each technique, including financial considerations associated with intellectual property rights, must therefore be carefully weighed before deciding on the type of assay to implement (Table 4).
This Special Article summarizes results from a nationwide laboratory survey of JAK2 and MPL mutation analysis.
ASXL1.
The spectrum of GATA2 mutations in MDS/AML, Emberger, or MonoMAC syndrome patients is large.
For two additional subjects who carried missense mutations (subjects 96 and 97), we designed allelic discrimination assays (using PCR with allele-specific probes and high-resolution melting analysis, HRM) and tested a cohort of 250 unaffected individuals (controls) (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Table 2).
6.3. GATA2 IS A CRITICAL REGULATOR OF GRANULOCYTE DEVELOPMENT.
She had a history of recurrent gingivitis and skin infection consistent with chronic neutropenia (12 years before AML) and monocytopenia.
Intellectual property restrictions may influence the choice of a JAK2 V617F assay, given that Ipsogen (Marseille, France) acquired a worldwide license on testing for this mutation in 2006.
The IPSS assigns patients to one of four groups of increasing prognostic risk (low, intermediate 1, intermediate 2, and high) on the basis of the percentage of blasts in bone marrow, the karyotype, and the number of cytopenias present at the time of diagnosis (see Table 2 in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org).
The diagnoses of CMML, including subclassification into CMML-1 or CMML-2, and documentation regarding the presence or absence of ring sideroblasts and LT were according to the 2008 WHO criteria.
In three individuals, we examined whether the mutant mRNA was expressed (Supplementary Fig. 6 and Supplementary Methods).
For this reason, the terms heterozygous and homozygous should generally be avoided in clinical reports.
Most laboratories reported their results as a JAK2 V617 percentage of unmutated alleles.
Ideally, JAK2 analysis for investigating the cause of neutrophilia and thrombocytosis would follow a determination of the absence of the BCR-ABL1 translocation t(9;22).
For a qualitative assay, the sensitivity must be defined.
The panel has included subcutaneous cytarabine, 5-azacytidine, and decitabine as low-intensity treatment options, and clofarabine as an intermediate-intensity treatment option for patients with AML who are 60 years or older.
Somatic mutations of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene have been identified in a number of cancer cell lines and primary cancers.
For the remaining patients with mutations, the somatic  origin could not be confirmed due to lack of suitable material.
Subsequently, a survival analysis based on a planned data cutoff with 4 additional months of follow-up (median follow-up, 51 weeks) revealed a significant survival advantage for patients who received ruxolitinib, with 13 deaths in the ruxolitinib group (8.4%) and 24 deaths in the placebo group (15.6%) (hazard ratio, 0.50; 95% CI, 0.25 to 0.98; P = 0.04) (Fig. 3).
In terms of understanding the effects of ASXL1 loss in vivo, Fisher et al reported the phenotype of mice with a germline gene-trap allele of Asxl1.
But mutations in TP53, EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, and ASXL1 also emerged as independent predictors of survival.
Individual disclosures for the NCCN Acute Myeloid Leukemia Panel members can be found on page 1021. (The most recent version of these guidelines and accompanying disclosures are available on the NCCN Web site at NCCN.org.) These guidelines are also available on the Internet.
These findings were confirmed in subsequent analyses from other large cooperative group studies.
The resulting list of candidate SNVs was filtered with R.
The 'GATA switch' requires the interaction of GATA1 with the transcriptional co-factor Friend of GATA1 (FOG1) (Fig. 2).
The monocytopenia, together with the infectious spectrum composed by pyogenic or mycobacteria infections and HPV-related warts, have some similarities to the MonoMAC syndrome.
As shown in Table 2, all of these variables retained a significant independent prognostic effect on OS.
This data implements that cohesin mutations could be potentially used for minimal residual disease monitoring.
The significant difference in overall and leukemia-free survival between the mutationally high- and low-risk groups was apparent when lower-risk categories (low plus intermediate-1 risk patients) were considered separately from higher-risk categories (intermediate-2 plus high-risk patients) (Figures 3a and b).
For all applicable variables, however, patients with missing baseline values were excluded from the analyses of change and percent change from baseline.
The median age of the cohort was 71 years (range 20-90 years), with 67% of the patients being males.
ASXL1, EZH2, KDM6A, IDH1 exon 4, IDH2 exon 4, and ETV6 were analyzed by means of Sanger sequencing.
cytometry.
TABLE I. Oligonucleotide Primers for Studying the PTEN/MMAC1 Gene.
This result differs from our previous studies of FHIT and TSG101, in which deletions were located at the exon- intron junction region.
If the relapse is detected when the tumor burden is low and the patient has a previously identified sibling or unrelated donor, salvage chemotherapy followed by allogeneic HSCT can be considered.
Future Directions for JAK2 and MPL Mutation Testing.
RNA sequencing from TCGA patients was downloaded from the TCGA repository.
Death occurred in 176 patients (28.5%), including 115 of 399 patients with JAK2 (V617F) (29%), 27 of 140 with a CALR exon 9 indel (19%), 10 of 25 (40%) with an MPL (W515) mutation, and 24 of 53 triple-negative patients (45%).
The most common CSF3R mutation in CNL/aCML is the membrane proximal mutation: T618I.
Mutations in DNMT3A have also been observed in patients with MDS, as well as less commonly in patients with classic MPNs (BOX 1; TABLE 1).
For patients younger than 50 years, consolidation with high-dose cytarabine was associated with similar rates of treatment-related mortality (2% vs. 0%) and grade 3 or higher neurologic toxicity (2% vs. 0%) compared with standard dose.
The presence (vs. the absence) of EZH2 mutations was strongly associated with decreased overall survival in the stepwise, multi-variable model that considered age, sex, IPSS risk group, and the presence of other mutations (hazard ratio for death, 2.13 [95% CI, 1.36 to 3.33]).
Five laboratories had two or more false-negative results, suggesting that the assays of these laboratories may have been of lower sensitivity than those of most participating laboratories.
RUNX1 mutations have been found at a much higher frequency (23.6%) in patients with refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), RAEB in transformation (RAEB-T), and AML following MDS with relative low blast count, suggesting that it is associated with a high-risk phenotype.
Among all patients who received consolidation with high-dose cytarabine, the rates of treatment-related deaths and serious neurotoxicity were 5% and 12%, respectively.
An estimate of the relative abundance of mutant to wild-type alleles may be provided; this is especially important for novel mutations, which could represent previously unreported germline SNPs.
In contrast to previously reported findings in smaller sample sets, neither monoallelic nor bi-allelic mutations were associated with IPSS risk group or overall survival (Fig. 6 in the Supplementary Appendix).
For patients whose clinical condition has deteriorated such that active treatment is no longer appropriate, best supportive care should be continued.
Similar conclusions were reached in studies of patients with PV and ET treated with busulfan.
This interaction is given through a specific motif located at the FOG1 N-terminus, providing a mechanism for GATA1-dependent gene repression.
The population of HSCs that is capable of both self-renewal and the production of short-term haematopoietic stem or progenitor cells.
The findings of this study provide a proof of concept that a genetic classification of PMF is not only feasible but also highly relevant to clinical decision-making as regards diagnostic approach and prognostication.
Progression to blast phase according to JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status.
Rafael Bejar; Kristen Stevenson; M.S.; Omar Abdel-Wahab; Naomi Galili; Bjorn Nilsson; Guillermo Garcia-Manero; Hagop Kantarjian; Azra Raza; Ross L. Levine; Donna Neuberg; Sc.D.; Benjamin L. Ebert.
This is notable, as both EZH2 and the TET family of proteins have been implicated in epigenetic regulation of gene transcription.
The incidence of combined IDH1/2 mutations in MDS is variable, ranging from 2.2% to 12%.
However, these GATA2 mutations have not been detected in acute myeloid leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome, acute lymphoid leukemia or chronic lymphoid leukemia patients.
There are no standard methods for detecting the rare JAK2 mutations, nor for MPL mutations.
The limited studies to date of IDH-mutant AML cells suggest that IDH2-R172 mutations result in a higher level of 2-HG than IDH1-R132 mutations.
However, the genomic landscape of PMF has changed considerably since then.
All SF3B1 mutations were located in exon 14 or 15, with the K700 mutation being the most recurrent (Figure 1B).
Because mutant CBL lacks E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, the protein is unable to act as a negative regulator to attenuate signaling function.
GATA factors constitute a family of evolutionarily conserved proteins that play crucial roles in the development and differentiation of eukaryotic organisms.
Laboratory Practice Guidelines for Detecting and Reporting JAK2 and MPL Mutations in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms: A Report of the Association for Molecular Pathology.
In all, 27 of these 79 cases (34.2%) harbored a mutation in ASXL1, not including 14 cases that harbored the putative c.1934dupG germline variant.
Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) is essential for normal hematopoiesis.
Ruxolitinib, a selective inhibitor of Janus kinase (JAK) 1 and 2, has clinically significant activity in myelofibrosis.
Myelofibrosis, a myeloproliferative neoplasm, is manifested by abnormal blood counts (anemia, thrombocytosis or thrombocytopenia, and leukocytosis or leukopenia), splenomegaly, and debilitating symptoms (e.g., fatigue, weakness, abdominal pain, cachexia, weight loss, pruritus, night sweats, and bone pain), which are thought to be caused by the combined effects of massive splenomegaly and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines.
Unexpectedly, these mice, and similar strains with GATA3 replacement of GATA1, showed almost complete rescue of erythropoiesis.
Figure 1. The frequency and the pair-wise co-occurrence of mutations in the 483 PMF patients included in the European cohort are represented by a Circos diagram in (a). Co-occurring mutations are indicated in the clockwise direction. In the Circos representation, the length of the arc corresponds to the frequency of mutation in the first gene (color coded) and the width of the ribbon corresponds to the frequency of patients who also had a mutation in the second gene. The frequency of mutations in this cohort is shown on the right side. (b) shows the prevalence proportion of individual mutations in the four IPSS risk categories.
The current challenge is to develop a prognostic model that accounts for both clinical and molecular parameters, including relevant subclonal mutations, and that in perspective may be useful also for predicting response to different treatments.
ASXL1 mutations were more frequent in EZH2-(11% versus 3%; P<0.002), TET2-(11% versus 4%; P = 0.043), DNMT3A-(11% versus 2%; P = 0.022), CBL-(11% versus 2%; P<0.001) and SRSF2-(13.5% versus 7%; P = 0.035) mutated patients.
RUNX1 and CEBPA, 2 oncogenes encoding transcription factors, have been linked to familial AML and MDS.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Florida.
For instance, the ASXL1 mutation is associated with leukemic transformation in CMML.
As was the case in the current study, SRSF2, EZH2 and IDH1 mutations have previously been associated with poor outcome in MDS and IDH1 in distinct subtypes of AML.
RESULTS.
Although no propensity to malignancy has been described, these children have a markedly abbreviated lifespan, abrogating the oncogenic propensity of these defects.
GATA3 essentially contributes to the development of T lymphocytes.
Accounting for them is not only relevant to clinical decision-making, but should also be considered in designing clinical trials.
Patients who experienced a CR after both treatment cycles were eligible to receive consolidation with a third cycle of chemotherapy or autologous or allogeneic HSCT.
Recent studies demonstrated the TET proteins (TET1-3) are Fe(II)- and alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes that catalyse the conversion of 5-mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) in DNA24 (FIG. 1).
These mutations fall into 2 classes: nonsense or frameshift mutations that lead to premature truncation of the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor (truncation mutations) and point mutations in the extracellular domain of CSF3R (membrane proximal mutations).
So far, risk stratification in PMF has been essentially based on demographic, clinical, and hematologic parameters.
The median follow-up of the cohort was 20.4 months (range, 1-282 months).
Mutations occurred throughout the genes without the presence of a mutational hotspot.
DISCUSSION.
Another conspicuous feature of splicing factor mutations is the presence of mutational hot spots in major mutational targets, including SF3B1, SRSF2 and U2AF35.
Other options include an allogeneic HSCT if a matched sibling or alternative donor has been identified, or participation in a clinical trial.
A total of 3 mug of DNA extracted from the BM sample of patient number 6225 (blast infiltration, 30%) was fragmented by sonication to 150-200 bp and ligated to an oligonucleotide adaptor.
Coupled with genetic complementation analysis and transcriptional profiling, this study revealed a rich collection of targets containing a characteristic binding motif of greater complexity than WGATAR.
Mutated allele frequencies were similar between NPM1 and cohesin gene mutations. Overall survival (OS), relapse-free survival (RFS), and complete remission rates (CR) were not influenced by the presence of cohesin mutations (OS: hazard ratio [HR] 0.98; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.56-1.72 [P = .94]; RFS: HR 0.7; 95% CI, 0.36-1.38 [P = .3]; CR: mutated 83% vs wild-type 76% [P = .45]).
It is important to note that the development of HSCs from the hemogenic endothelium is a NOTCH1-regulated event and is impaired in NOTCH1 deficient mouse embryos [125].
The need for a cardiac evaluation should be determined by individual risk factors, such as patient and family history or previous malignancy treated with cardiotoxic drugs or thoracic radiation.
Likewise, enzymatic activities associated with genes involved in leukaemic transformation - including H3K79 methyl transferase activity, histone acetyltransferase activity and other chromatin enzymatic functions - have just recently been explored from a therapeutic standpoint.
More recently, mutational profiling of a large cohort of patients with MDS reported that mutations in EZH2 were associated with worsened overall survival, independent of known clinical predictors of worsened survival in MDS such as the International Prognostic Scoring System (TABLE 1).
Thus, many phase I/II trials for AML in the older patient include categories such as CR incomplete (CRi) for patients who have fewer than 5% marrow blasts but mild residual cytopenia.
Direct sequencing of the aberrant band showed an insertion of 4 bases (CCCG) at nt 1423 of exon 5 (Fig. 3B).
The only described disease phenotype associated with TET2 in MPN is older age.
Felicitas Thol; Robin Bollin; Marten Gehlhaar; Carolin Walter; Martin Dugas; Karl Josef Suchanek; Aylin Kirchner; Liu Huang; Anuhar Chaturvedi; Martin Wichmann; Lutz Wiehlmann; Rabia Shahswar; Frederik Damm; Gudrun Gohring; Brigitte Schlegelberger; Richard Schlenk; Konstanze Dohner; Hartmut Dohner; Jurgen Krauter; Arnold Ganser; Michael Heuser.
CALR-mutant patients were significantly younger, had lower leukocyte count, higher platelet count, and lower IPSS risk.
This is based on the higher prevalence of unfavorable cytogenetics and antecedent myelodysplasia, along with a higher incidence of multidrug resistance in patients older than 60 years, and an increased frequency of comorbid medical conditions that affect the patient's ability to tolerate intensive treatment.
Although the CALGB trial did not show an overall benefit for higher doses of cytarabine consolidation in older patients, a subset of patients with a good performance status, normal renal function, and a normal or low risk karyotype might be considered for a single cycle of cytarabine (1.0-1.5 g/m2/d x 4-6 doses) without an anthracycline.
Because of the large numbers of diverse mutations, large studies will be needed to fully evaluate the correlation between the mutation status of spliceosomal genes and other genes in a proper fashion.
We found a strong association between mutations affecting the cohesin complex and NPM1.
The proportion of patients with a reduction of 35% or more in spleen volume at week 24 (primary end point) was 41.9% in the ruxolitinib group as compared with 0.7% in the placebo group (odds ratio, 134.4; 95% confidence interval [CI], 18.0 to 1004.9; P<0.001) (Fig. 1A).
This uses bone marrow blast percentage, karyotype and the number of cytopenias to determine a risk score that is then used to predict median survival and time to transformation to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
The prognostic relevance of IDH mutations depends on the mutation identified.
We did not find the patterns of mutations, that is, missense or nonsense/frameshift, to have any influence on clinical outcome.
Among patients with unfavorable cytogenetics, the 4-year OS rate in the subgroup of patients with monosomal karyotype was 3% compared with 13% in the subgroup without monosomal karyotype.
Early studies also suggest that HOXB genes may also be important targets of DNMT3A, and the methylation of HOXB genes is altered in DNMT3A-mutant AML cells.
The most important results of this study of the effect of spliceosomal mutations on the transcriptome are that the associated splicing defects affect a specific subset of mRNAs (Figure 3; supplemental Figures 8-9).
Patient number 5677 (P5, II, 1) presented with WHIM-like syndrome with HPV-induced warts, clinical features of extended sarcoidosis, neutropenia, lymphopenia, monocytopenia, and a severe defect in NK cells.
BCOR mutations were detected in about 4% (10 of 262) of an unselected cohort of de novo CN-AML.
When this laboratory was excluded, there was complete concordance for 29 specimens, 18 of which were in the high category, 9 were in the moderate category, and 2 were in the low category.
Affymetrix U133plus2 CEL files for 183 MDS patients and 17 healthy controls in Gene Expression Omnibus GSE19429 were pooled using Bioconductor's gcrma tools for quantile normalization.
EVI1 is predominantly expressed in HSCs, suggesting a physiological role for this protein in these cells.
In a recent retrospective study that evaluated the prognostic impact of monosomal karyotype in older patients (age > 60 years; N = 186) with unfavorable cytogenetics treated on a GOELAMS trial, the 2-year OS rate was significantly decreased among patients with monosomal karyotype compared with those without this abnormality (7% vs. 22%; P < .0001); similar outcomes were observed within the subgroup of patients with complex karyotype.
A Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Ruxolitinib for Myelofibrosis.
For example, it is unclear how JAK2 (or JAK1 (REF. 95)) enters the nucleus, as the JAKs do not contain known nuclear-localization sequences.
Immortalization of murine cells transduced with mutant SETBP1 has been demonstrated, highlighting the oncogenicity of this genetic lesion.
Frequency and distribution of mutations.
Besides alterations in TET2, CBL, ASXL1 and the RAS pathway, EZH2 is targeted by various types of frameshift and point mutations.
Participation in clinical trials is especially encouraged.
On multivariable analysis that included the aforementioned variables, only increased AMC (>10 x 109/l, relative risk (RR) 2.5, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.7-3.8), presence of circulating IMC (RR 2.0, 95% CI 1.4-2.7), decreased hemoglobin (<10 g/dl, RR 1.6, 99% CI 1.2-2.2) and decreased platelet count (<100 x 109/l, RR 1.4, 99% CI 1.0-1.9) retained significance.
Mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing and are only reported if they were detected by Sanger sequencing either in genomic DNA or in an independently whole genome-amplified DNA sample.
Earlier studies of RUNX1 mutations in CMML were carried out by the PCR-single-strand conformational polymorphism approach, and mainly focused on RHD (exons 3--5).
Details of the treatment protocols have been previously reported.
Five mutants (nos. 26--30) with frameshift mutations located in exons 7b or 8 producing stop codons downstream of the normal termination codon 453 are expected to retain the DNA-binding potential but to lose transactivation ability, and to act as dominant negative inhibitors of wild-type RUNX1, as described by Harada et al.
The non-finger domains of the GATA proteins diverged substantially during molecular evolution, suggesting that they may contribute to the unique functions of individual GATA factors.
EZH2 missense, donor-splice-site and frameshift mutations predicting truncated proteins were observed in 8 out of 126 subjects (6%; Table 1 and Fig. 1b).
The most frequent causes of death were intracranial hemorrhage, progressive disease/blastic transformation, and regimen-related toxicity from induction chemotherapy or transplantation.
Cloning analysis.
Key Point: Mutations of key transcription factor in myeloid malignancies.
The use of MPL analysis is best considered after pathology review of a bone marrow biopsy and aspirate.
Grade 4 episodes of bleeding occurred in 1.3% of patients who received ruxolitinib and in 1.3% of patients who received placebo.
Genes encoding hematopoietic GATA factors usually contain two first exons that are tissue specific, and have different 5-untranslated regions (UTR).
The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency, clinical implications, and prognostic influence of mutations in the cohesin complex in the context of other prognostic markers in a cohort of 389 uniformly treated AML patients.
The frequency of chromosomal changes in aCML is more variable, ranging from 20% to 88% in 4 series.
By examining the composition of GATA1-associated protein complexes in a conditional erythroid rescue system, as well as through the use of tiling arrays, they detected that the SCL complex was present at all activating GATA elements.
What Is the Current State of Practice in Clinical Laboratories for JAK2 and MPL Mutation Testing?
c-KIT mutations have been reported in approximately 20% of patients with CBF AML.
Polyclonal T-cell cultures were generated from viably frozen cells from subjects 10, 40 and 73 (Supplementary Methods).
Warts were considered when they numbered >= 10 or when they presented as genital condylomata acuminata.
Cohesin gene mutations have no clear prognostic impact in AML patients.
Therapeutic response and clinical outcomes in patients with cohesin alterations.
Induction therapy with high-dose cytarabine was associated with significantly higher rates of treatment-related mortality (14% vs. 5% for patients age < 50 years; 20% vs. 12% for patients age 50-64 years; P = .003) and grade 3 or higher neurologic toxicity (8% vs. 2% for patients < 50 years; 5% vs. 0.5% for patients age 50-64 years; P < .0001).
Increased response rates have also been reported when lenalidomide is used in patients with del(5)(q31).
Serial studies performed on patients from the initial diagnosis of low-risk MDS through subsequent transformation indicate that U2AF1 mutations may represent early ancestral events.
We investigated its origin using 4 highly polymorphic short tandem repeats, 2 centromeric to GATA2 (D3S3606 and D3S3607) and 2 telomeric to GATA2 (D3S1587 and D3S1292).
DNMT3A.
However, the expression of these GATA factors is not limited to the hematopoietic compartment and they are also present in other tissues, where they play important roles in development.
On multivariable analysis, increased AMC (>10 x 109/l, relative risk (RR) 2.5, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.7-3.8), presence of circulating IMC (RR 2.0, 95% CI 1.4-2.7), decreased hemoglobin (<10 g/dl, RR 1.6, 99% CI 1.2-2.2) and decreased platelet count (<100 x 109/l, RR 1.4, 99% CI 1.0-1.9) remained significant.
Positive controls for MPL mutations are more difficult to obtain.
GATA2 is a member of the GATA transcription factor family characterized by a 2 zinc finger domains binding to the DNA sequence WGATAR and a transactivation domain.
Efficacy.
In addition to their association with sporadic MPN, MPL mutations are also associated with familial diseases.
Figure 2. Prognostic impact of cohesin mutations in all investigated AML patients. (A) OS in AML patients with wild-type (WT) or mutated genes of the cohesin complex. (B) RFS in AML patients with WT or mutated genes of the cohesin complex.
All of these mutations were somatic as confirmed by sequencing of the corresponding germline-derived DNA.
As reported previously, mutations of genes involved in tyrosinesignaling pathways (JAK2, CBL, and NRAS-KRAS- BRAF) were largely mutually exclusive (Fig. 1).
Figure 2. Proposed Diagnostic Strategy for Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPN). Initial Screening Should Be for BCR-ABL1. Positive Test is Diagnostic for Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML). If Clinical Suspicion Exists for BCR-ABL1 Negative MPN, Then Screen for JAK2V617F Mutation. JAK2 is Diagnostic for MPN. Bone Marrow (BM) Biopsy is Required for Diagnosis of Essential Thrombocythemia (ET) and Primary Myelofibrosis (PMF), and Can Be Helpful in JAK2 Negative Polycythemia Vera (PV).
All the mutations detected here disrupt highly conserved amino acids (Supplementary Fig. 8).
Also known as the citric acid cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The Krebs cycle is a series of chemical reactions that is used by all aerobic organisms to generate NADH and certain amino acids through the oxidation of acetate.
The differences in phenotypes described among these reports may be attributable to the different approaches used to target Tet2.
However, such significant effects seem less in each background-matched specific disease phenotype by multivariate analysis, including, for example, International Prognostic Scoring System score.
Although data are emerging on the prognostic relevance of mutations in the IDH and DNMT3A genes (see earlier discussions), the role of these molecular lesions on the risk stratification of patients with AML remains to be defined.
Additionally, we identified 4 patients with mutations in RAD21 and 2 patients with mutations in SMC1A (Figure 1).
Interestingly, a study in patients with NK-AML showed that prognosis was worse among patients with FLT3-ITD without a wild-type FLT3, compared with those with FLT3-ITD but having a wild-type FLT3 in the second allele.
Our knowledge of the mechanisms that promote malignant myeloid transformation has evolved as a result of an improved understanding of the range of genetic events that are found in patients with these disorders.
The presence of overlapping features between MDS and myeloproliferative neoplasm has given rise to ambiguity with regard to diagnosis and prognostication of patients with CMML.
The Mayo prognostic model performed better than the MDAPS, G-MDAPS and the Spanish cytogenetic risk models (Figure 2).
On the other hand, the implication of the impaired function of GATA2 in solid tumors has only been studied in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer and neuroblastoma.
A series of small studies that involved 55 patients with PMF, 25 patients with PMF, and 104 patients with PMF, PV, or ET reported a 47% 5-year probability of survival, 41% projected 2-year overall survival, and 58% 3-year survival, respectively.
Whole exome sequencing has revealed the otherwise unexpected involvement of multiple components of the RNA splicing machinery by gene mutations that characterize MDS and related myeloid neoplasms and as such, demonstrated the power of massively parallel sequencing technologies in cancer research.
Current Paradigms.
Similar results were reported for myelofibrosis.
However, the  strategies leading to the discovery of BCOR and BCORL1 mutations in AML differed.
Karyotype was normal.
In late 2010, a sample exchange for interlaboratory comparison of assays for MPNs was organized by the AMP.
Harada et al. did not find RUNX1 mutations in four patients with CMML, nor did Preudhomme et al. in 27 CMML patients.
Disease phenotypes associated with JAK2 exon 12 mutations include younger age at diagnosis, subnormal erythropoietin (EPO) levels, and isolated erythrocytosis at clinical onset.
An ETV6 gene rearrangement is associated with a good prognosis in a subtype of acute lymphoblastic leukemia with t(11;22).
This advance clearly illustrates the clinical relevance of defining the molecular basis of hematologic malignancies.
The presence of ASXL1 mutations has also been independently associated with an inferior OS in low- and high-risk MDS patients.
Figure 2. The role of mutations and aberrant expression of chromatin modifiers in the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies. In the hierarchical recruitment model, transcriptional silencing begins with the recruitment of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and the induction of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)-mediated dimethylation (me2) and trimethylation (me3) of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27). PRC1 recognizes H3K27me3 through the chromodomain of Polycomb (PC) homologues. PRC1-mediated ubiquitylation (Ub) of lysine 119 of histone H2A (H2AK119) follows, leading to chromatin compaction and the recruitment by PRC2 of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) to target-gene loci. Currently, EZH2 is known to be affected by loss-of-function mutations in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and MDS/MPN overlap disorders. Other PRC2 members are less commonly affected by loss-of-function mutations and copy-number loss, including suppressor of zeste 12 homologue (SUZ12), embryonic ectoderm development (EED) and JARID2. Overexpression of a PRC1 component, BMI1, is known to result in increased haematopoietic stem cell self-renewal from mouse studies, but BMI1 overexpression is not known to be a recurrent alteration in human myeloid malignancy. PRC1 activity recruits DNMTs, including DNMT3A, which is known to be affected by suspected loss-of-function mutations in all types of human myeloid malignancies. Removal of H2AK119 ubiquitylation in Drosophila melanogaster and in mammalian cells in vitro occurs by the Polycomb-repressive deubiquitylase (PR-DUB) complex, which consists of calypso (the D. melanogaster orthologue of BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1)) and addition of sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1). However, the presence of this PR-DUB has not been demonstrated in mammalian cells in vivo, and more recent data in mammalian myeloid leukaemia cells suggest that ASXL1 expression is strongly correlated with an abundance of H3K27me3 in addition to physically interacting with PRC2. Mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL) is a member of a multiprotein complex that mediates methylation of H3K4 within the promoter region of genes through its SET domain. MLL is known to be affected by mutations that result in a partial tandem-duplication (PTD) and by translocations that result in in-frame fusions of the amino-terminus of MLL to one of >50 different partners and loss of the H3K4 methyltransferase SET domain. MLL-PTD has been shown to result in increased levels of H3K4me3, whereas translocated MLL recruits the H3K79 methyltransferase DOT1L. The multiple physical associations that MLL requires for its function has led to the development of various therapeutic approaches to abrogate the activity of mutant MLL.
Four patients were identified with missense mutations in SMC3 and 1 patient with the stop codon being changed to leucine (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 4).
Further evidence also supports that a wide spectrum of genetic aberrations has been implicated in the prognosis and behavior of individual MDS cases.
The methodology summary of sequencing assays should clearly state the regions covered by the assay.
Finally, all patients require attentive supportive care related both to the underlying leukemia (ie, tumor lysis syndrome) and the adverse effects of chemotherapy (see on page 996).
Daunorubicin Pathway Interaction Database: http://pid.nci.nih.gov .
Comparisons of quantitative variables between groups of patients were carried out by the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
Background.
Patient outcome in primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is significantly influenced by karyotype.
Demographic and clinical characteristics of the study patients are detailed in Table 1 in the Supplementary Appendix.
OS endpoints measured from the date of entry into one of the prospective studies were death (failure) and alive at last follow-up (censored).
A complete review of other JAK2 inhibitors is discussed elsewhere.
Similar to findings with IDH1 mutations, reports on the prognostic effect of IDH2 mutations have also been inconsistent.
An accurate diagnosis is more likely when one or more of a JAK2V617F mutation, cytogenetic abnormalities (+9, del[13q]), anemia, elevated serum LDH, and leukoerythroblastosis are present.
First, mutations outside the coding region were excluded.
Table 2. Clinical characteristics of patients treated with HMAs.
The definition of complete remission (CR), overall survival (OS), and relapse-free survival (RFS) followed recommended criteria.
DATABASES.
After excluding all known single-nucleotide polymorphisms and filtering out alterations present in paired germline samples, somatic alterations in cohesin complex genes were identified in 11.6% of patients, including STAG2 (5.9%), RAD21 (2%), and SMC3 (2%).
More recently, mutant JAK2 was shown to phosphorylate PRMT5, an arginine methyltransferase, much more effectively than wild-type JAK2 (REF. 94).
Grade 3 episodes of bleeding (terms for bleeding events are described in the Supplementary Appendix) occurred in 2.6% of patients who received ruxolitinib and in 2.0% of patients who received placebo.
The model was generated from a stepwise Cox regression model that included the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) risk category (based on the percentage of blasts in bone marrow, the karyotype, and the number of cytopenias [see Table 2 in the Supplementary Appendix]), age, sex, and mutation status for genes that were mutated in 1% or more of the 428 samples for which the IPSS classification was recalculated. Age was included in the analysis as a categorical variable on the basis of a best-split algorithm showing a significant difference in overall survival between patients less than 55 years of age and those 55 years of age or older (see Table 8 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Numerous studies have shown the negative prognostic influence of FLT3-ITD in patients with AML, resulting in shorter remission durations (eg, decreased diseasefree survival [DFS] in patients with a CR) and poorer survival outcomes compared with patients with wild-type FLT3.
There was less reproducibility between laboratories in the lower ranges, presumably because of greater variance of the method in the low range.
We identified a heterozygous nonsense GATA2 E224X mutation (c.670G > T, supplemental Figure 1) that was not detected in the parents' samples.
Abnormal bands detected by SSCP analysis were analyzed for mutation by direct sequencing.
Diagnosis was confirmed and assigned according to World Health Organization classification criteria.
Ninety-three percent of patients with PMF showed a decrease in spleen size of >20 cm.
Two of the nine affected patients concomitantly harbored two different EZH2 mutations, however, these were located on two separate amplicons not allowing to discriminate between a monoor biallelic state.
A group of clonal myeloid disorders that involve precursor cells with a reduced capacity to differentiate into more mature cellular elements and with increased proliferation and self-renewal.
In an analysis of data from patients treated on SWOG protocols (N = 1344; age 16-88 years), 13% of patients were found to have monosomal karyotype; nearly all of these cases (98%) occurred within the unfavorable cytogenetics category.
Median survival is listed for specific mutations present in at least 4 of the 439 samples (1%). A patient could have multiple mutations. The P values are for median survival in the group of patients with a mutated gene versus the group of patients without a mutation in that gene. CI denotes confidence interval.
Sanger sequencing of 310 patients was performed to assess phenotype/genotype associations.
Evaluation and Treatment of CNS Leukemia.
The 2008 World Health Organization classification of hematopoietic neoplasms includes JAK2 mutations as diagnostic criteria in PV and JAK2 and MPL mutations in ET and PMF.
The prognostic relevance of the molecular consequence associated with TET2 mutation has also been investigated in MDS.
At this point, we will examine the switching profile that GATA1 and GATA2 shows during erythroid cell differentiation.
After crossover, data for patients who were initially assigned to placebo were not included in the analyses, except for the intention-to-treat analysis of overall survival.
Notably, all three spliceosome mutations were mutually exclusive.
Recurrent DNMT3A mutations have been identified in de novo AML (62 of 281 patients, 22.1%) and have been associated with an intermediate-risk cytogenetic profile.
These recommendations are based on a review of recently published clinical trials that have led to significant improvements in treatment or have yielded new information regarding biologic factors that may have prognostic importance.
Interestingly, it has been recently reported that acetylation of EVI1 at Lys564 by P/CAF enhances the DNA-binding capacity of EVI1 and thereby contributes to the transcriptional activation of GATA2.
The NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) for AML provide recommendations on the diagnostic evaluation and workup for AML, risk assessment based on cytogenetic and molecular features, treatment options for induction and consolidation therapies for younger and older (age >= 65 years) adult patients, and key supportive care considerations.
Thus far, in CMML, loss-of-function gene mutations involving ASXL1 and EZH2 has been associated with poor outcome.
Ta-Chih Liu; Pai-Mei Lin; Jan-Gowth Chang; Jing-Ping Lee; Tyen-Po Chen; Sheng-Fung Lin.
Thrombocytopenia rarely recurred at a grade 3 or 4 level after appropriate dose modifications and was not associated with an increase in bleeding events, although bruising was more common in the ruxolitinib group.
The samples were from patients representative of the general population of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (Table 1 in the Supplementary Appendix).
S3A, S3B, and S3C in the Supplementary Appendix).
Considering the prognostic relevance of ASXL1 mutations for survival and SRSF2 and IDH1 mutations for leukemia-free survival, the Mayo cohort was divided into mutationally high (ASXL1, SRSF2 or IDH1 mutated) and mutationally low (none of the above) risk categories, which showed significant difference in both overall (multivariable HR accounting for DIPSS-plus: 1.4, 95% CI: 1.0-1.9; P = 0.04) and leukemia-free (multivariable HR accounting for karyotype and thrombocytopenia: 3.2, 95% CI: 1.6-6.4; P = 0.001) survival.
Marlene Pasquet; Christine Bellanne-Chantelot; Suzanne Tavitian; Nais Prade; Blandine Beaupain; Olivier LaRochelle; Arnaud Petit; Pierre Rohrlich; Christophe Ferrand; Eric Van Den Neste; Helene A. Poirel; Thierry Lamy; Marie Ouachee-Chardin; Veronique Mansat-De Mas; Jill Corre; Christian Recher; Genevieve Plat; Francoise Bachelerie; Jean Donadieu; Eric Delabesse.
Leukemia-free survival was calculated from the date of first referral to the date of LT (uncensored) or death/last contact (censored).
ECOG, performance status of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; FAB, French-American-British classification of AML; FLT3-ITD, internal tandem duplication of the FLT3 gene; no., number; P, P value from two-sided x-squared tests for categorical variables and from 2-sided Student t or Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for continuous variables.
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the BCOR (top) and BCORL1 (bottom) transcriptional corepressors with their respective domains and the location and type of mutations occurring in AML patients. The numbers above the arrows indicate the presence, in more than one case, of the same type of mutation occurring at the same exonic location or involving the splicing of the same intron. BCORL1 mutations also include five mutations that were found in four AML cell lines and in the Jurkat T-lymphoblastic leukemia cell line. The specific type (i.e. frameshift, nonsense, missense or splice-site) of BCORL1 mutations was inferred from Li et al.
Cox models were used to identify correlates with OS.
Commitment of hematopoietic stem cells/early progenitor cells (HSC/HPC) to specific lineages takes place within the bone marrow microenvironment under the influence of multiple regulatory factors.
An additional patient had a silent mutation (Ile87Ile).
Insensitive molecular assays would cause an even bigger problem in ET, in which up to 75% of cases have a JAK2 V617F level of less than 25% and a considerable number (40% of cases) have a JAK2 V617F level of less than 10%.
However, phlebotomy is still recommended with current guidelines that suggest an Hct target of <50%.
By analyzing copy-number alterations with the use of SNP arrays and oncogene mutations, by means of high-throughput genotyping, we identified new mutations in ETV6 and GNAS.
In the latter study from the UK MRC, the 5-year OS rate among patients with and without FLT3-TKD mutations was 53% versus 37%, respectively.
Isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 genes (IDH1/2) encode isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDHs), which catalyze the NADP+ -dependent decarboxylation of isocitrate to alpha-hetoglutarate (alpha-KG) or 2-oxoglutarate (2OG), a key intermediate and an essential cofactor for a number of enzymes in the Kreb cycle (the tricarboxylic acid cycle), leading to the production of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP).
Using mass-spectrometric genotyping, we examined these samples for 953 recurrent mutations in 111 cancer-associated genes.
We identified and validated mutations in 10 genes: NRAS, KRAS, BRAF, JAK2, GNAS, FLNB, MET, EGFR, CDH1, and PTPN11.
Notably, PRC2 associates only with the fusion oncoprotein and not with endogenous PML or RARalpha.
Although we could readily detect EZH2 protein in cell lines and in primary T cells, no EZH2 protein expression could be measured in the total bone marrow of individuals with MDS irrespective of the presence or absence of EZH2 mutations.
Notably, the majority of somatic DNMT3A mutations result either in premature truncation of the protein product (nonsense or frameshift mutations), or occur at a single amino acid, R882.
In subjects 10 and 127, mutant mRNA was detected, but pyrosequencing and GeneScan analysis showed that the mutant sequences were expressed at lower levels than wild-type sequences, suggesting a decreased stability of the mutant transcript.
SETBP1 protects SET from protease cleavage, thus increasing the amount of SET available to repress the activity of PP2A.
Five deaths were recorded, 3 as a direct consequence of the leukemic evolution (patient numbers 6227, 5758, and 5677), 1 related to a flu-mediated pneumonia in a patient in complete remission of AML with immunodeficiency (patient number 6184), and 1 in a patient who died from an aortic dissection at the age of 36 (patient number 7107).
However, clinical outcome, even in patients with normal karyotype AML (NK-AML), is heterogeneous.
The panel strongly recommends clinical trials as standard therapy for patients with poor prognostic features, which include FLT3 abnormalities in the setting of otherwise normal karyotype, high WBC (> 50,000/mcL) at diagnosis, or 2 cycles of induction therapy needed to achieve CR.
These two novel classes of epigenetic mutations probably contribute to leukaemic transformation by affecting epigenetic regulation, thus generating a chromatin landscape that can sustain, and cooperate with, the effect of class I and class II mutations.
All the authors vouch for the accuracy and completeness of the reported data and for the fidelity of this report to the protocol.
They found that DNMT3A mutations were present in 22% of adult cases of AML and were associated with an increased risk of relapse in a single-institution patient cohort (TABLE 1).
Subsequent biochemical studies demonstrated that 2-HG inhibits TET family members as alpha-ketoglutarate is an essential cofactor of TET and its levels are reduced by the production of 2-HG.
After washing, the eluate was amplified by PCR for 12 cycles.
Compared to typical APL cases with t(15;17), this patient showed distinct morphological features, i.e. rectangular body inclusions in the cytoplasm of leukemic cells and an atypical clinical course characterized by multiple relapses following chemotherapy plus all-transretinoic acid.
For this subset of patients, therapy with multiple cycles of high-dose cytarabine is a category 1 option, and allogeneic HSCT should be reserved until relapse.
Transcription factors are master regulators of development that control complex genetic networks.
Some karyotypic abnormalities, such as deletion of chromosome 5q, help establish the prognosis and may be associated with a specific clinical phenotype.
In a separate phase 3 trial with a median follow-up of 61 weeks, there were no transformations to AML in 146 patients who received ruxolitinib and two transformations in 73 patients who received the best available therapy.
As indicated above, the GATA2 gene harbors two alternative untranslated first exons.
Rasburicase is a genetically engineered recombinant form of urate oxidase enzyme.
With respect to lenalidomide-treated patients (8 cohesin mutant and 84 WT), we did not observe a significant difference in response rate in cohesin mutant (50%) vs cohesin WT (52%) patients.
TET2 mutations were the most prevalent genetic abnormality identified in our sample set.
The L359V has an opposite effect to the T354M and M355del mutations, with a gain of function effect for the former and a loss of function for the latter.
5-hmC is also more commonly enriched at gene exons compared with introns.
There was no difference in overall survival between patients with and without RUNX1 mutations, but a trend of higher risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) progression was observed in mutation-positive patients (16/30 vs 17/51, P = 0.102), especially in patients with C-terminal mutations (P = 0.023).
Numerous studies have identified BMI1, a core member of the PRC1 complex that is crucial for its H2AK119 ubiquitin ligase activity (FIG. 2), as an important regulator of both HSC and leukaemia stem cell (LSC) self-renewal.
Thirty-two RUNX1 mutations were detected in 30 patients (37%); 23 mutants were located in the N-terminal part and 9 in the C-terminal region.
Clinical presentations of pedigree 1.
The rate of evolution of patients with severe congenital neutropenia is 10.8% at 20 years increasing to 18.8% in patients with SBDS mutations.
Taken together, 16.7% (5/30) of CMML patients carrying RUNX1 mutations had cooperating mutations of FLT3 or RAS genes.
These observations led to the notion that a key function of GATA2 is to maintain the proliferative progenitor-cell phenotype, and that its downregulation is necessary for differentiation.
STAG1, STAG2, SMC3, and RAD21 mutations had no influence on OS and RFS, whereas the analysis was not performed for SMC1A due to the low mutation frequency (Table 2).
The presence of IDH2 mutations was mutually exclusive with IDH1 mutation in nearly all cases.
The occurrence of subclonal driver mutations might be closely related to the early initiating genetic lesions, as recently observed in myelodysplastic syndromes.
The 2 well-documented categories of cytotoxic agents associated with the development of therapy-related MDS/AML are alkylating agents (eg, cyclophosphamide, melphalan) and topoisomerase inhibitors/agents that interact with topoisomerase (eg, etoposide, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone).
He is still in hematologic and cytogenetic remission 2 years after HSCT.
Median follow-up time for all patients was 5.1 years (range, 0.19 to 12.2 years).
Figure 2.  Hazard Ratios for Death from Any Cause, According to Presence (vs.  Absence) of Mutation in Each of Seven Genes.  Results are shown, on a log10 scale, for univariate analyses as well as for analyses with adjustment for the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) risk category (based on the percentage of blasts in bone marrow, the karyotype, and the number of cytopenias) (for details, see Table 2 in the Supplementary Appendix).  CI denotes confidence interval.
In MDS, the rate of DNMT3A mutations appears to be lower, in the range of 2-8%.
The integrity and purity of total RNA were assessed with Agilent Bioanalyzer. cDNA (1-2 mug) was generated with Clontech SmartPCR cDNA kit (Clontech Laboratories) from 100 ng of total RNA.
We selected for GATA2 by screening 14 probands from a series of 544 patients included in the registry.
In the aforementioned EORTC/GIMEMA trial, a 43% 4-year DFS rate was reported in the donor group of patients with poor-risk cytogenetics (n = 64; 73% underwent HSCT); this was significantly higher than the 4-year DFS rate (18%; P = .008) among the no-donor group (n = 94; 46% underwent HSCT), although only approximately half of the patients were able to proceed with the planned HSCT in the no-donor group.
The other GATA family members, GATA4, GATA5 and GATA6, are mainly expressed in tissues of mesodermal and endodermal origin such as the heart, liver, lung, gut, and gonads, where they play critical roles in regulating tissue-specific gene expression.
In myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), deletions of chromosome 7 or 7q are common and correlate with a poor prognosis.  The relevant genes on chromosome 7 are unknown.
GERMLINE MUTATION ANALYSIS.
Of note, ETV6 fusion with PDGFRB or IL3 may result in MPNs with eosinophilia.
Abbreviations: ALC, absolute lymphocyte count; AMC, absolute monocyte count; ANC, absolute neutrophil count; ASXL1, additional sex combs 1 gene; BM, bone marrow; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; PB, peripheral blood; SF3B1, splicing factor 3B subunit 1; SRSF2, serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2; U2AF35, U2 small-nuclear RNA auxiliary factor 1; WBC, white blood cell count.
The recent identification of mutations in genes involved in epigenetic regulation has elucidated novel mechanisms of transformation.
The most common ASXL1 mutation was c.1934dupG;p.Gly646TrpfsX12 (n = 47, 54%), followed by the 1900_1922_del seen in 10 (11%) patients.
IDH1 mutation was also associated with worse EFS and OS outcomes among the subgroup of patients with intermediate-risk NK-AML (wild-type NPM1 without FLT3-ITD).
Moreover, it is known that GATA2 overexpression in hematopoietic cell lines induces megakaryocytic differentiation (Fig. 4B).
It has been recently reported that high GATA2 expression is a common event in patients with prostate cancer (83.7%), and can influence the regulation of androgen-dependent genes, such as KLK2 and AZGP1.
These data are underscored by recent studies which suggest that alterations in these pathways have prognostic relevance in MDS and AML.
Table 1. Demographic and clinical features at diagnosis of 617 patients with PMF subdivided according to their genotype (JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status).
Because large segmental regions of UPD may harbor acquired homozygous mutations, we sequenced EZH2 in the bone marrow cells of the two subjects who showed UPD at 7q (Fig. 1a; subjects 97 and 103).
In contrast, patients with an isolated FLT3-ITD mutation and normal karyotype have an outlook similar to those with poor-risk cytogenetics and should be considered for a clinical trial or early allogeneic HSCT.
UTX mutations have been identified in a variety of cancers, including some hematopoietic cell lines of myeloid origin, e.g., CMML (8%), but have been seldom found in MDS (1%).
Gene expression profiling was performed on total cellular RNA isolated from CD34+ cells of a subset of patients from the European cohort, randomly selected among those defined at 'mutationally high-risk' or 'mutationally low-risk' as described in Supplementary Methods.
For whole-exome sequencing, the 50 Mb of protein coding sequences was enriched from total genomic DNA by liquid-phase hybridization using SureSelect (version 4) (Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA), followed by massively parallel sequencing with HiSequation 2000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA).
None of these mutations were found in any of the unaffected subjects (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 5).
Further mutational screening in other malignancies might uncover the pathogenesis of common or unique tumorgenesis in various tissues.
Demonstration of a JAK2V617 PB mutation confirms the presence of MPN and is highly suggestive of ET in the absence of erythrocytosis.
With the exception of refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS-T), higher frequencies (38-43%) appear to be associated with an MDS/MPN phenotype.
MPL.
In this double-blind trial, we randomly assigned patients with intermediate-2 or high-risk myelofibrosis to twice-daily oral ruxolitinib (155 patients) or placebo (154 patients).
One patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) has been reported to carry the 45,-Y,t(X;17)(p11;q12) karyotype, leading to the formation of a BCOR-RAR alpha fusion gene.
Mutations listed in the National Center for Biotechnology Information's SNP database (dbSNP, build 130), previously reported as germ line, or present in the buccal sample from any patient in our cohort were considered to be germ line and were excluded from further analysis (Table 5 in the Supplementary Appendix).
A median of 498 reads per amplicon (range 162-740) were obtained for IDH1, IDH2, NPM1 and EZH2, thus yielding a sufficient coverage for mutation detection with high sensitivity.
In keeping with the prominent role of G-CSF in the production of neutrophils, deletion of CSF3R leads to neutropenia in mouse models.
Epigenetic mutations are modifications that are reversible with therapy.
By definition, mutations in this class of genes affect global chromatin landscapes and many genes and pathways are altered; thus, simple linear explanations are unlikely to precisely show how these mutations contribute to leukaemia development.
Illumina libraries were made from qualified fragmented gDNA with the use of NEBNext reagents (New England Biolabs), and the resulting libraries were subjected to exome enrichment with the use of NimbleGen SeqCap EZ Human Exome Library Version 2.0 (Roche NimbleGen) according to the manufacturer's instructions.
These genotype-phenotype associations may reflect gene-specific functions of individual mutations.
Sanger sequencing analysis.
Figure 4. Kaplan-Meier analysis of survival of PMF patients stratified according to their driver mutation. Vertical tick marks indicate right-censored patients. In univariate analysis, CALR-mutant patients had a better OS than JAK2-mutant (HR 2.3, P = .001), MPL-mutant (HR 2.6, P = .009), and triple-negative patients (HR 6.2, P = .001). Three JAK2-mutant patients had short follow-up and were not included in the analysis.
Hideki Makishima; Valeria Visconte; Hirotoshi Sakaguchi; Anna M. Jankowska; Sarah Abu Kar; Andres Jerez; Bartlomiej Przychodzen; Manoj Bupathi; Kathryn Guinta; Manuel G. Afable; Mikkael A. Sekeres; Richard A. Padgett; Ramon V. Tiu; and Jaroslaw P. Maciejewski.
However, these studies have used purified mutant protein alone, and further studies of in vivo function in the presence of the wild-type allele are required to definitively establish the expression level and effect of R882 and other mutations on normal enzymatic function.
Quantitative controls for the JAK2 V617F mutation are commercially available (Horizon Discovery, Cambridge, UK; Qiagen Marseille, Marseille, France) to serve as a quantitative or low-positive control.
The patient had 3 sons and 2 miscarriages.
Longer-term follow-up will be required to better define rates of AML transformation.
Mutations in other PRC2 components are less common than EZH2 mutations in patients with myeloid malignancies: 1.4% of patients with PMF or MDS/MPN overlap disorders have SUZ12 mutations and less than 1% have EED deletions or mutations.
In the ruxolitinib group, patients with new-onset grade 3 or 4 anemia had symptomatic improvement similar to that in patients without anemia.
It has been shown that granulocytic isolation achieves, on average, only 15% higher JAK2 allele burden compared with that of whole white blood cells.
Methods.
A JAK2 exon-12 mutation screen may be warranted in patients who were JAK2V617F negative, particularly in those with subnormal EPO levels.
Further study will be needed to clarify these possibilities and to understand how different genotypic combinations of leukaemia-associated disease alleles result in biologically, therapeutically and prognostically distinct myeloid leukaemia phenotypes.
We then examined whether the mutation status for each gene was associated with clinical variables, including specific cytopenias, the proportion of blasts, and overall survival.
Despite the demonstrated role of cohesin in mitosis, the mechanism by which altered cohesin function leads to clonal expansion and malignant transformation has not been elucidated.
In addition, the 2-year death rate in CR was significantly lower in the ambulatory arm (0% vs. 5%; P = .04) and no differences were observed in the cumulative relapse rate between arms.
Absence of both BCR-ABL1 and rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 are minimal diagnostic requirements for CNL and aCML.
Current prognostic scoring systems consider karyotypic abnormalities and certain clinical features to stratify patients with myelodysplastic syndromes into risk groups.
Women who are pregnant or who are likely to become pregnant can be managed with aspirin and venesection but should use interferon (INF)-alpha in place of hydroxyurea when the later is indicated.
Nearly all SF3B1 mutations are located in exon 14 or 15, most commonly at K700E.
These results seem to suggest that in patients with NK-AML without FLT3-ITD, NPM1 mutations confer a survival benefit only in the presence of concurrent IDH mutations.
Base calling was performed using Illumina RTA Version 1.8 using default settings.
Affecting at least eight components of the RNA splicing machinery, mutations were found in 130 of 228 MDS (57 %), 48 of 88 CMML (55 %) and 16 of 62 secondary AML (25.8 %) cases, but relatively rare in de novo AML (10/151; 6.6 %) and MPNs (5/53; 9.4 %).
The Patient Global Impression of Change and other patient-reported outcomes mirrored changes in symptom scores (Fig.
Clonal hierarchy analysis was performed to determine if cohesin complex gene variants were ancestral or secondary genetic events.
ABSTRACT.
Cohesin mutations did not alter the IPSS cytogenetic risk of MDS patients (the average IPSS cytogenetics score was 0.55 points for cohesin mutant cohort and 0.60 points for WT).
Fusion genes involving the PDGFb receptor gene at 5q33 are characterized by a distinct phenotype of CMML-eos.
A technique that is used for determining the extent and pattern of DNA methylation within and around individual genes or an entire genome.
Each of the prognostically significant mutations most likely alters the biologic characteristics and phenotype of myelodysplastic syndromes in unique ways, as is the case for cytogenetic abnormalities, with complex interactions among combinations of genetic and epigenetic lesions.
ASXL1 mutations were detected in 87 (49%) out of 179 analyzed patients, 72% (63) being male, with a median age of 70 years (range 27-86 years).
In addition to translocations, gene deletions and somatic mutations of ETV6 have been identified in myeloid malignancies, including MDS and AML, with evidence that deletion of ETV6 was frequently accompanied by monosomy 7.
The clinical significance of SRSF2 mutations has also been explored.
PCR-SSCP Analysis.
Mutation of NRAS, previously reported as a marker of poor prognosis, did not influence survival in this model, most likely owing to strong associations between oncogenic NRAS mutations and components of the IPSS.
Jason Gotlib; Julia E. Maxson; Tracy I. George;Jeffrey W. Tyner.
Given the molecular heterogeneity of myeloid neoplasms, precise establishment of the clinical impact of these leukemia disease alleles and their relevance to clinical phenotype, somatic genotype, and clinical outcome requires large patient cohorts with detailed clinical annotation.
Cohesin gene family sequence alterations in myeloid neoplasms.
Preliminary trials incorporating FLT3 inhibitors either as part of induction or postremission therapy (including post-HSCT) continue; however, the agents currently under investigation have shown only minimal impact.
Table 1. Comparison of pretreatment characteristics between patients with and without mutations in the cohesin complex genes.
We have demonstrated that somatic alterations in cohesin complex genes occur in 11.6% of patients with myeloid neoplasms in our cohort, consistent with recent reports in smaller patient cohorts.
The presence of SETBP1 mutation often accompanies leukocytosis, monosomy 7/deletion of 7q, isochromosome of 17p, and mutations of ASXL1, EZH2, and SRSF2.
These enzymes include prolyl hydroxylases and chromatin-modifying enzymes (e.g., histone demethylases and TET-5mC hydroxylases).
No mutation hotspot was identified in any of the genes (Figure 1 and supplemental Tables 2-6).
Such mutations probably constitute a new class of TSGs ubiquitously involved in leukemogenesis.
She underwent treatment with intensive chemotherapy that was complicated by pulmonary aspergillosis.
Two principle studies have helped to establish INF-alpha as an effective therapy.
Interestingly, we found a strong correlation between the cohesin gene and NPM1 mutations (57% of cohesin gene mutated patients had an NPM1 mutation; 9.5% of NPM1 mutated patients had a cohesin gene mutation compared with 4% of NPM1 wild-type patients; P = .029) (Table 1).
Ficoll density centrifugation should be avoided, because it depletes the granulocytic population (which carries the mutations).
Four of the 5 cell lines (80%) displayed the aberrant transcripts; all 5 displayed the normal transcript (Fig. 1B). In addition, four of the 30 normal volunteers (13%) exhibited both a normal and an aberrant fragments (Fig. 1A).
Therapy-related myeloid leukemia (secondary MDS/AML) is a well-recognized consequence of cancer treatment in a proportion of patients receiving cytotoxic therapy for solid tumors or hematologic malignancies.
These mutations alter pre-mRNA splicing patterns.
Cytogenetics.
ABSTRACT.
In a European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) trial, patients with high-risk myelodysplasia or AML evolving from myelodysplasia who received allogeneic HSCT without prior cytarabinebased chemotherapy had a 3-year DFS rate of 34%.
The clinical evolution in MDS or AML of patients with germline GATA2 mutations is frequently associated with a partial or complete deletion of chromosome 7: 6 of 11 patients in our study (2 with the R330X mutation, 1 with the A372T mutation, 2 with the R396Q mutation, and 1 with deletion of GATA2 locus), 4 of 10 patients in Kazenwadel et al (T354M, 2 distinct large deletions of GATA2 locus and a frameshift starting from L332), 6 of 28 patients in Hahn et al (T354M or deletion of T355), and the case described by Bodor et al (T354M), suggesting that the monosomy 7q is a recurrent secondary event linked to the overt transformation.
At a median follow-up of 15 months, considering all 226 patients, 176 (78%) deaths and 32 (14%) LTs were documented.
Statistical analyses.
Mechanistic analyses provided evidence for crossregulatory and autoregulatory interactions among components of this complex, including GATA2 induction of the hematopoietic corepressor ETO2, and an ETO2 negative autoregulatory loop.
Genetic evaluation finally identified a heterozygous missense GATA2 A372T mutation (c.1114G > A, supplemental Figure 1).
Below is a summary of frequently mutated genes in MDS relevant to this pathway and their consequences.
Consequently, we sequenced 120 cases for ZRSR2, LUC7L2, and PRPF8 and a total 310 for SF3B1, U2AF1, and SRSF2.
Interestingly, we found a similar mutation burden between NPM1 and genes of the cohesin complex in most patients (supplemental Figure 1), suggesting that cohesin gene mutations occurred in the same clone as NPM1 mutations.
We estimated the time to development of anemia (here defined as a hemoglobin level <10 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (platelet [PLT] count <100 x 109/L), and marked leukocytosis (white blood cell [WBC] count >25 x 109/L) using a competing risk approach.
Aspirin for thromboprophylaxis in PV was previously limited because of a documented risk of gastrointestinal bleeding with high doses (900 mg/day).
The median time to AML progression was 6.8 months in patients with C-terminal mutations compared with 28.3 months in those without mutations (P = 0.022).
A quantitative assay or a reasonably sensitive qualitative assay is therefore essential for capturing the cases with low levels of the mutation.
P, P value from univariate or multivariate Cox proportional hazards models.
N-ZnF contributes to the stabilization and specificity of DNA binding, and mediates the formation of complexes with cofactors.
Dosing should aim to decrease platelets below 400 x 109/L and maintain leukocytes above 2 x 109/L.
Inclusion in the current study required the availability of demographic, clinical, and hematologic data at diagnosis (age, evaluation of constitutional symptoms, hemoglobin level, white blood cell count, and percentage of blasts in peripheral blood) that allow calculation of IPSS, and at least 1 DNA sample to assess mutation status of the 3 driver genes: JAK2, MPL, and CALR.
Table 1. Clinical characteristics of patients with cohesin family gene defects.
These sites regulate the expression of specific genes that govern physiological cell identity and pluripotency/self-renewal in malignancy and in embryonic stem cells.
RNA splicing provides a basic cellular mechanism for expression of genetic information.
Three years later, at age 14, her second child (patient number 6225; P1, III, 3) developed an AML M2 associated with myelodysplasia-related changes with a similar cytologic presentation to his mother.
Two papers have provided new insights into GATA2 regulatory networks by conducting a comprehensive analysis of GATA2 binding sites by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), a powerful method for studying transcription factor function.
A higher allelic burden in PV is associated with pruritus and increased splenomegaly, and has been implicated in myelofibrotic transformation.
As EZH2 functions as a histone methyltransferase, abnormal histone modification may contribute to epigenetic deregulation in MDS.
In addition, another study indicated that BCOR mutations were more frequently found in AML with normal karyotype (17.1%) than in unselected cases (3.8%), but with no differences among low- or high-risk MDS subgroups according to IPSS score.
Given the essential role of the GATA2 transcription factor in hematopoiesis, it is crucial to elucidate its mechanisms and the full spectrum of target genes that mediate its activity.
Methylation of CpG islands and 'shores' within promoter regions leads to transcriptional silencing through binding of methyl-DNA-binding proteins and chromatin modifying enzymes.
In patients who have symptomatic splenomegaly, hydroxyurea (500 mg t.i.d.) should be used.
Mutation was absent in a cohort of 250 unaffected donors.
In the analysis of prognostic factors, variables included were age, sex, hemoglobin, white blood cell count (WBC), absolute neutrophil count, absolute monocyte count (AMC), ALC, platelet count, PB and BM blasts, circulating IMC, BM cellularity, percentage of BM ring sideroblasts, WHO morphological subcategories (CMML-1 vs CMML-2), karyotype groups based on the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system, MDAPS and G-MDAPS prognostic risk categories, ASXL1 mutations and spliceosome component mutations, involving SF3B1, SRSF2 and U2AF35 (also referred to as U2AF1).
ABSTRACT.
Their results suggest that the study of this transcription factor and its downstream targets may uncover a regulatory network important for coronary artery disease inheritance.
Occasionally, patients with both myeloid and lymphoid markers at diagnosis (biphenotypic leukemia) may experience response to ALL therapy if an AML induction regimen failed.
3. STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF GATA2.
To ensure that more than 90% of cases are detected, the adequate analytical sensitivity of a clinical JAK2 assay should be at least 1%.
Representations generated by HpaII and by MspI restriction enzyme digestion of the genome followed by ligation-mediated PCR are compared to generate maps of methylation abundance and distribution.
Mayo prognostic model for WHO-defined chronic myelomonocytic leukemia: ASXL1 and spliceosome component mutations and outcomes.
Although one study has described this as a PCR artefact, as it is not found in germline DNAs, control DNAs or other studied types of cancers, it is generally considered to be a bona fide mutation.
The frequent evolution to MDS and AML in these patients reveals the importance of screening GATA2 in chronic neutropenia associated with monocytopenia because of the frequent hematopoietic transformation, variable clinical expression at onset, and the need for aggressive therapy in patients with poor clinical outcome.
Conversely, high FOG1 levels in maturing erythroid/megakaryocytic cells inhibit GATA2 expression, leading to further elevation of FOG1 and reduced GATA2 expression.
Precise spatio-temporal control of GATA1 and GATA2 expression is required in early hematopoietic progenitors to determine erythroid/megakaryocyte versus granulocyte/monocyte lineage output, as well as in the subsequent differentiation of erythroid cells and megakaryocytes.
As mentioned above, ASXL1 and spliceosome component mutations had no impact on OS.
These patients were entered into the multicenter treatment trial AML SHG 0199 (#NCT00209833, June 1999 to September 2004, n = 276) or AML SHG 0295 (February 1995 to May 1999, n = 113) for whom pretreatment cell samples were available.
One approach to improving the IPSS would be to include one additional variable: the presence or absence of a mutation in any of the five genes with independent prognostic significance.
Therefore, ASXL1 mutations represent a relatively frequent and independent prognostic biomarker in myeloid malignancies.
DNMT3A also forms complexes with DNMT3L, a DNMT family member that lacks a methyltransferase catalytic domain; formation of the DNMT3A-DNMT3L complex results in increased DNMT3A activity.
Patnaik et al identified JAK2 mutations in 6.4% of patients with isolated del(5q) MDS (5 of 77 patients), with JAK2 V617F allele burden ranging from 1% to 10%.
PCR products were separated by electrophoresis at 70 W for 2 hr in 6% denaturing polyacrylamide gels containing 7 M urea. Gels were dried and autoradiographed for 6-18 hr.
The process of haematopoietic differentiation from haematopoietic stem cells to mature granulocytes, monocytes, erythroid cells and megakaryocytes.
Cohesin defects were associated with poor overall survival (27.2 vs 40 months; P = .023), especially in STAG2 mutant MDS patients surviving >12 months (median survival 35 vs 50 months; P = .017).
Although germline mutations in SMC1A, SMC3, and RAD21 have been associated with cohesinopathies, pathogenic STAG1 germline mutations have not been reported.
These are then cleaved by an endonuclease, and the resulting single-strand break can then be processed by either short-patch BER (through which a single nucleotide is replaced) or long-patch BER (through which 2-10 new nucleotides are synthesized).
The selected observations were validated by targeted deep sequencing using MiSeq.
Table 1. Clinicohematological characteristics and mutation patterns of patients with RUNX1 mutations at initial diagnosis of CMML.
Imai et al. found that one of five CMML patients examined had V105X mutation and Nakao et al. reported that one out of eight patients with CMML had RUNX1 mutation.
Figure 4. Analysis of clonal hierarchy points toward cohesin as a secondary mutation. (A-B) Exemplary serial samples illustrating clonal architecture of cohesin family genes. (C) VAFs of STAG2 mutations by deep sequencing in serial samples. For each STAG2 mutant patient with available serial samples, the VAF in each sampling is shown. Although only 2 patients were found to harbor a STAG2 mutation in the dominant clone at the first time point, 7 out of 8 patients (87.5%) who were initially found to have a subclonal STAG2 mutation underwent clonal expansion, becoming the dominant clone at the time of transformation (P = .05). (D) VAFs of SMC3 and RAD21 mutations by deep sequencing in serial samples. For 4 patients with SMC3 mutations and the 1 patient with a RAD21 mutation with available serial samples, the VAF in each sampling is shown. All of these 5 patients harbored subclonal cohesin mutations at the first time point, with 2 out of 4 (50%) of the SMC3 mutant patients and the 1 out of 1 RAD21 mutant patient undergoing clonal expansion, becoming the dominant clone at the time of transformation.
Splenic irradiation when using either 100-500 cGy in 5-10 fractions or 100 cGy in 4 fractions may help transiently reduce spleen size.
The first JAK2 mutation (JAK2-V617F) was identified in patients with MPN and was found to be an activating mutation within the JH2 pseudokinase domain (reviewed in REF. 92).
Within our cohort, we analyzed response to therapeutic interventions of lenalidomide (n = 92; supplemental Table 7) or the hypomethylating agents (HMAs) decitabine and azacitidine (n = 140; Table 2).
The panel uniformly endorsed allogeneic HSCT with matched sibling or matched unrelated donor (including cord blood) or clinical trial as consolidation therapy for patients with poor-risk cytogenetics or molecular abnormalities.
The discovery that the TET family of enzymes places novel modifications on cytosine-methylated DNA has led to rapidly increasing insight into the biological function of modified DNA cytosine residues.
The starting dose of ruxolitinib depended on the baseline platelet count: 15 mg twice daily for a platelet count of 100x109 to 200x109 per liter and 20 mg twice daily for a count that exceeded 200x109 per liter.
Clinical and biologic annotations of the samples have been declared to the Comite National Informatique et Libertes.
In addition to regulating normal neutrophil homeostasis, G-CSF levels rapidly increase during infection, resulting in elevated levels of neutrophils as a component of the immune response.
Direct Sanger sequencing or pyrosequencing has been used for assessment of JAK2 and MPL mutations.
The PcG member that has been most frequently implicated in the pathogenesis of human malignancies is EZH2, the enzymatic component of the PRC2 complex.
A multivariable analysis that included all three mutations as covariates confirmed their inter-independent prognostic value: HR was 1.91 (95% CI: 1.1-3.36; P = 0.025) for EZH2, 2.21 (95% CI: 1.57-3.11; P<0.0001) for ASXL1 and 2.6 (95% CI: 1.63-41.6; P<0.0001) for SRSF2 mutations.
Initial analysis was performed on 483 European patients studied within 1 year of diagnosis; the seminal observations were subsequently validated in an independent cohort of 396 patients studied at time of referral (including both newly and previously diagnosed patients) to the Mayo Clinic and receiving treatment according to current practice.
No aberrant splice variants were detected using primers from exon 11 to exon 13 or when exon 11 to exon 20 primers were used (Supplementary Methods).
Outcomes were poor for patients with monosomal karyotype at baseline (n = 83), although the high-dose regimen was associated with significantly improved rates of 5-year EFS (13% vs. 0%; P = .02) and OS (16% vs. 0%; P = .02) compared with those of the intermediate-dose in this subgroup.
Given the controversy surrounding the c.1934dupG;p.Gly646TrpfsX12 ASXL1 mutation, we reanalyzed our cohort after excluding these patients and found no differences in our observations.
Since GATA2 levels decreased with differentiation in each of the various hematopoietic sub-lineages, this pattern might reflect the ability of overexpressed or activated GATA2 to suppress normal differentiation and promote leukemic transformation.
Recently, Ayala et al detected GATA2 expression by quantitative real-time PCR in 52% (21/41) cases; however, their data referred to patients that express GATA2, instead of patients with GATA2 overexpression.
When transfusion support is required, leukocyte-depleted blood products should be used for transfusion.
The mechanism by which this occurs and the presumed targets of epigenetic modification remain elusive.
These data suggest that somatic alterations in epigenetic regulators are a common genetic event in myeloid malignancies and contribute to haematopoietic transformation.
The molecular consequences of the mutations identified here can be classified in 2 distinct groups, the first with mutations located in or close to the second GATA2 zinc finger (A372T mutation in P2 located between the third [C370] and fourth [C373] cysteines of the zinc finger, M388V in P3 and R396Q in P1) and the second with the complete loss of 1 allele of GATA2 (P7) or creation of a stop codon leading to the loss of the second zinc finger (R330X mutation in P4 located in the first zinc finger, R204X [P5] and E224X [P6] mutations leading to the loss of the 2 zinc fingers).
This will also be informative regarding the extent to which CSF3R mutation is a primary driver of disease.
Interestingly, the IDH2-R172 mutation seemed to be mutually exclusive with NPM1 mutations and FLT3-ITD.
Minor infections were defined as those for which patients did not seek medical attention (eg, stomatologic, ear, nose, and throat infections).
This phosphorylation causes downregulation of PRMT5 activity and blocks the specific interaction of PRMT5 with methylosome protein 50 (MEP50).
Median overall survival was 17.7 years in CALR-mutant, 9.2 years in JAK2-mutant, 9.1 years in MPL-mutant, and 3.2 years in triple-negative patients.
Figure 6. Kaplan-Meier analysis of survival of PMF patients stratified according to the risk categories defined by a clinical-molecular prognostic model. This model includes the variables reported in Table 2, that is, IPSS variables plus CALR, JAK2, and MPL mutation status. We assigned each factor an integer weight according to the corresponding HR in the multivariable-Cox regression of Table 2. Scores were then recoded into the 5 risk categories shown in this figure: details are reported in the last section of "Results." Based on the Akaike information criterion, which compares quality of models, the clinical-molecular model provided a better stratification than the IPSS. This analysis serves as a proof of concept that accounting for driver mutations improves the risk stratification provided by IPSS.
These mutations have been reported to result in a decreased global 5hmC level with a concomitant increase in 5mC genomic DNA.
The highest frequency (33.7%) of mutations was found in patients with cytogenetically normal AML.
We identified a heterozygous missense GATA2 M388V mutation (c.1162A > G, supplemental Figure 1).
Recent studies have also identified subclonal mutations in genes like ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, IDH1, and IDH2, which are commonly associated with disease progression and identify PMF patients at high risk for leukemic transformation or premature death.
Examination of log (2log) survival plots and partial residuals confirmed that the underlying assumption of proportional hazards was met except in the case wherein survival curves are equal during the first 12 months and separate drastically thereafter (Figure 3); we therefore dichotomized follow-up into before and after 12 months.
Multivariate analysis consisting of age, IPSS score, transfusion dependency, and mutational status indicated that the presence of a BCOR mutation was an independent unfavorable prognostic factor for OS.
However, the lower repopulation of mutant-transduced stem cells raises a serious difficulty to our understanding of how U2AF35 mutated cells achieve clonal dominance over the remaining normal hematopoietic cells, although some oncogenes, such as oncogenic RAS, have been shown to induce apoptosis rather than transformation and promotion of cell growth depending on cell contexts.
In vitro data suggest that DNA methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTIs; e.g., decitabine and azacitidine) suppress the protein expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3A, followed by suppression of growth and methylation in leukemic cell lines, whereas DNMT3B mutations have been identified in inherited immunodeficiency, centrosome instability, and facial anomalies (ICF syndrome).
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) makes no representation or warranties of any kind regarding their content, use, or application and disclaims any responsibility for their applications or use in any way.
Another gene recently described to be mutated in clonal hematological diseases is ASXL1 on chromosome 20q11.1.
Taken together, these data suggest that the classical twohit model of myeloid malignancy pathogenesis must be modified to account for novel classes of mutant disease alleles, most notably mutations in epigenetic modifiers.
In the present study, we describe the initial identification by exome sequencing of GATA2 mutation in a mother and her 3 children associated with a prior history of chronic mild neutropenia evolving to AML and/or MDS.
ASSOCIATIONS OF MUTATIONS WITH OVERALL SURVIVAL.
Although targeting of BCORL1 mutations to the expressed allele in female AML patients was not formally demonstrated by Li et al, the above findings again point to BCORL1 as a tumor-suppressor gene that is inactivated by mutations in a subset of AML.
A previously unrecognized translational isoform of FOG1 has been identified.
In contrast to the irreversible nature of somatic mutations, epigenetic modifications are theoretically alterable and thus a potential target for therapeutic interventions.
Another 16 specimens yielded false-positive results.
These findings may also lend more specificity to the WHO diagnostic criteria for CNL and aCML, which are variably applied in routine clinical practice.
In the UK MRC AML 10 trial, significant benefit with allogeneic HSCT was observed for the subgroup of patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetics (but not for those with favorable or high-risk cytogenetics); in this subgroup, the DFS (50% vs. 39%; P = .004) and OS rates (55% vs. 44%; P = .02) were significantly higher among the donor groups than the nodonor groups.
Most laboratories reported analytical sensitivities in the 1% to 5% range; only two laboratories indicated analytical sensitivities of less than 1%.
8. IMPAIRED GATA2 FUNCTION IN LEUKEMIA.
When both cohorts were subjected to multivariable analysis that included recently developed prognostic models for survival in PMF (IPSS3 in the European cohort and DIPSS-plus in the Mayo cohort), only ASXL1 mutations retained their significance.
In patients who have received standard-dose cytarabine induction and have residual blasts without hypoplasia, additional therapy with standard-dose cytarabine and anthracycline should be considered.
Nevertheless, studies have implicated the MDS phenotype in a broad spectrum of genetic abnormalities.
Although we may understand the specific activity of an individual gene and/or have derived general models of how epigenetic modifications affect transcription, we do not yet have a grasp of the crucial components that are altered by these epigenetic mutations and how this affects epigenetic patterning, gene expression and phenotypic alterations in haematopoietic cells.
Of greatest diagnostic effect are recurrent mutations found in specific genes.
The induction strategy is influenced by individual patient characteristics such as age, presence of comorbid conditions affecting performance status, and preexisting myelodysplasia.
Moreover, it has been demonstrated that GATA1 and/or GATA2 bind to a GATA motif located at the 3' enhancer region of WT1, playing an important role in the regulation of WT1 gene expression.
A recent study in 354 patients with MDS showed that mutations of BCOR and BCORL1 were identified in 4.8% and 0.8% of these patients, respectively, with higher frequency in patients with CMML and AML (7.4% and 9.1%, respectively).
Although some mutations in these factors are activating, most are loss-of-function or hypomorphic mutations and affect bona fide tumor suppressor genes (TSGs).
In our series, none of the patients bearing GATA2 mutations exhibit lymphedema or deafness.
TET2 mutations, in contrast, overlapped with lesions in nearly every other mutated gene, suggesting that TET2 mutations have a pathogenic role that is at least partially independent of other abnormalities.
Disease phenotypes associated with JAK2V617F mutations include older age, higher hemoglobin levels, leukocytosis, and lower platelet count.
TP53 is a tumor suppressor gene with a critical role in both cell cycle regulation and DNA repair.
However, other studies demonstrated that the presence of cohesin mutations did not have a negative impact on survival or response to treatment in AML.
Patients with t(8;21) or inv(16)/t(16;16) with c-KIT mutation are categorized as having intermediate risk AML (see "Risk Status Based on Cytogenetics and Molecular Abnormalities," on page 995).
Despite recent major advances in our understanding of the genetics of myeloid malignancies, there have been far fewer examples of how these insights have translated to novel therapies.
1. INTRODUCTION.
ASXL1, SF3B1 and SRSF2 mutation analysis was performed according to previously published methods.
The proportion of patients with unfavorable cytogenetics tends to be higher in the population with therapy-related AML.
RUNX1 mutations are frequent in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and mutations at the C-terminal region might predict acute myeloid leukemia transformation.
Efforts are continuously being made to identify additional genetic aberrations involved in the development of CMML.
Limitations of the Ipsogen qualitative assay (MutaScreen assay) were highlighted in a report that described two MPNs containing variant JAK2 mutations, each with the typical codon 617 (1849G>T) mutation, and in one case an additional codon 617 (1851C>T) substitution and a codon 618 (1852T>C) mutation, and in the other case an additional codon 618 (1853G>T) mutation.
Analysis of clonal dynamics in patients in whom serial samples are obtained at various time points along their disease course provides important insight into the timing and effect of cohesin loss of function on leukemia initiation and progression.
The CR rates were equivalent in both arms (71% and 74%, respectively), with significantly higher 5-year relapse-free survival rates with high-dose cytarabine (48% vs. 25%; P = .007).
The u white blood count is >13 x 109/L, with immature granulocytes >10% of leukocytes and <20% blasts in the blood and marrow.
According to a recent report, knock down of U2AF1 expression leads to the skipping of a specific exon of FECH during splicing.
INTRODUCTION.
If the LP is negative, the patient can be followed with a repeat LP if symptoms persist.
All of the deletions in aberrant transcripts involved exon 5 that contains the PTPase core motif.
If the marrow is hypoplastic (defined as cellularity < 10%-20% and residual blasts < 5%-10%), additional treatment selection may be deferred until marrow recovery, when the remission status can be assessed.
Recently, the transcription factor GATA2 has been identified as a new predisposing gene for familial AML/MDS.
Data from the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries and the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program have estimated the annual age-adjusted incidence of BCR-ABL1-negative MPD to be 2.1 per 100,000, with an overall 3-year survival rate of 80%.
HCT may be warranted in intermediate-2-risk or high-risk patients in which median survival is expected to be <5 years.
With the use of this targeted approach, we identified mutations in ZRSR2 (W153X) and SRSF2 (P95R; Figure 1D-E).
Furthermore, increased BFU-E, CFU-E, and CFU-GM colony formations were observed in primary cells with ASXL1 mutations.
Metaphase cytogenetics details were retrieved from 892 patients.
To minimize false positives and focus on the most prevalent or relevant somatic events, we implemented a rational bioanalytic filtering approach and applied heuristic bioanalytic pipelines.
One laboratory found an S505N mutation that was not detected by the other laboratories.
These genetic and epigenetic data suggested that IDH and TET2 mutations affect the same pathway.
Using genome-wide microarray analysis coupled with ChIP, Huang et al revealed that GATA2 regulates cell cycle regulators and megakaryocyte-specific genes.
The presence of reactive thrombosis does not exclude a diagnosis of essential thrombocytosis in the presence of 3 other major criteria.
New genetic findings in CNL and aCML.
Bruising (bleeding events related to skin and subcutaneous tissue) (see the Supplementary Appendix) was assessed separately.
Secondary efficacy variables were tested in a fixed-sequence testing procedure at an alpha level of 0.05.
An assay that detects less than 0.1% of JAK2 allele, therefore, is more likely to produce false-positive results in the diagnostic setting.
When Should JAK2 and MPL Mutational Analysis Be Performed?
To elucidate the exact impacts of splicing factor mutations, a well-designed control study should be required taking other common mutations also into account.
To detect germline variants of cohesin genes, our strategy was to select nonsynonymous variants present in both somatic and germline samples that are possibly deleterious.
A missense mutation within the pseudokinase domain of JAK2 (a change of valine to phenylalanine at the 617 position) causes constitutional activation of the tyrosine kinase in the absence of ligand stimulation (e.g., interferon, GM-CSF, erythropoietin, and thrombopoietin).
In addition, patients with unfavorable karyotypes, such as -7, -5, 11q23 abnormalities or complex cytogenetic abnormalities, are also considered poor-risk.
Figure 4. The contribution of Polycomb-mediated gene repression to the pathophysiology of APL. Fusion of the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene to the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA) gene results in a hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL): the PML-RARA fusion. Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) has been found to directly associate with the PML-RARalpha fusion protein but not to either endogenous protein alone. PRC2-mediated transcriptional repression is thought to have a role in the leukaemogenic activity of PML-RARalpha, and the loss of PRC2 components in mouse models of APL results in the differentiation of APL cells. A variant RARalpha translocation is the promyelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF)- RARalpha fusion, which results in a form of APL that is insensitive to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), the main therapeutic modality used to treat patients with APL. Interestingly, it has been shown that unlike PML-RARalpha, PLZF-RARalpha also interacts with PRC1 via direct association with BMI1 (REF. 98). Treatment with ATRA results in a loss of PRC2 recruitment by PLZF-RARalpha, whereas PRC1-mediated gene repression persists in an ATRA-insensitive manner. This explains, at least in part, the lack of efficacy of ATRA in PLZF-RARalpha-positive APL. CBX4, chromobox protein homologue 4; EED, embryonic ectoderm development; EZH2, enhancer of zeste homologue 2; H2AK119Ub, histone H2A ubiquitylated on lysine 119; H3K27me3, histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 27; PH1, polyhomeotic-like protein 1; SUZ12, suppressor of zeste 12 homologue.
The PCR amplification was performed in a volume of 25 muL containing 0.5 mug of genomic DNA, 2.5 pmol each of the primers, 5 muCi 35SdATP, 0.2 mM each of dNTPs, 1.25U AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase, and 1x PCR buffer.
Of the 617 subjects studied, 399 (64.7%) carried JAK2 (V617F), 140 (22.7%) had a CALR exon 9 indel, 25 (4.0%) carried an MPL (W515) mutation, and 53 (8.6%) had nonmutated JAK2, CALR, and MPL (so-called triple-negative PMF).
Patients with CALR mutation had a lower risk of developing anemia, thrombocytopenia, and marked leukocytosis compared with other subtypes.
These findings show that the association of some mutations with poor survival may be indirectly captured by the IPSS because of their associations with cytopenias, blast percentage, and karyotype.
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
The primers, M2u, M2d, and M3u, as described in Table I, were used for sequencing analysis.
All patients were followed up until death or for up to 88 months.
In a study of 137 patients with PV, 11% displayed abnormal genotypes, with Y- (7% of male patients), +8, +9, 20q-, and abnormalities of chromosome 1, 13q-, 11q-, 3p-, and dup13 were observed with the highest frequency.
Currently, the interactions of both IDH1 or IDH2 and DNMT3 mutations with other molecular changes require further investigation to determine the prognostic value in patients with NK-AML.
About two-thirds of mutations were either nonsense or frameshift changes, causing a premature stop codon.
The presence of an isolated NPM1 or CEBPA mutation improves prognosis only slightly less than for patients with CBF translocations (see "Initial Evaluation" on page 999).
Normal cytogenetics were present in 48% of mutant cases, whereas 10% had complex cytogenetics, a distribution comparable to WT patients.
Although initial reports (354 patients) suggested SF3B1 mutations convey significantly longer OS, leukemia-free survival (LFS), and event-free survival in their cohort, subsequent analysis of 323 MDS cases, patients carrying an SF3B1 mutation showed a significantly better OS and no effect on LFS in RARS and refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia with ringed sideroblasts (RCMD-RS).
An ECOG-led phase III trial is currently in progress, which will compare induction therapy with single-agent clofarabine versus cytarabine/daunorubicin in patients older than 60 years.
In terms of clinical features, triple-negative PMF is similar to the myelodysplastic syndrome associated with bone marrow fibrosis that we described previously.
There is no difference in analytical performance using peripheral blood or bone marrow samples for testing for JAK2 mutations, because granulocytes constitute the predominant population in both specimens.
For the European cohort, the Sanger technique was used to detect mutations across the entire coding region of EZH2 and TET2, and regions previously described as mutational hotspots for DNMT3A, CBL, ASXL1, IDH1, IDH2, SRSF2 and MPL; JAK2V617F was detected by real-time PCR(RT-PCR).
METHODS.
A total of 155 patients in the ruxolitinib group and 151 in the placebo group received at least one dose of the study medication and were included in the analysis of safety.
Here, the same cohort was used to identify affected genes on chromosome 7.
Which Methodologies Are Used to Detect JAK2 and MPL Mutations?
To address these issues from the laboratory perspective, here we present practice guidelines for JAK2 and MPL mutation testing and reporting.
In multivariable analysis that included the four mutations as covariates, ASXL1 (HR: 2.5, 95% CI: 1.5-4.1; P<0.0001), SRSF2 (HR: 2.73, 95% CI: 1.34-5.55; P = 0.005) and IDH1 or IDH2 (HR: 2.66, 95% CI: 1.10-6.47; P = 0.03), but not EZH2 (HR: 1.98, 95% CI: 0.88-4.46), mutations remained significant.
In univariate analysis, the presence of SRSF2, SF3B1 or U2AF35 mutations had no prognostic impact on OS or leukemia free survival (Table 3 and Figure 1).
If the clinical utility of mutations in other genes (eg, TET2, ASXL1, and EZH2) is established for MPNs, next-generation sequencing provides a way to expand the scope of the assay without significantly increasing the work required to perform the test.
Nevertheless, a simplified prognostic scoring scheme has great clinical value.
Table 3. 2008 World Health Organization Diagnostic Criteria for Primary Myelofibrosis.
Seven (3%) patients had an abnormality of chromosome 7 (monosomy 7-6 and del7q-1), 16 (7%) had +8 (9 as a single abnormality and 7 with an additional structural abnormality), 8 (4%) had a monosomal karyotype and 2 (1%) patients had a complex karyotype without monosomies.
In addition, an increase in immature thymic T cells and mature splenic B cells was observed in at least one Tet2-knockout mouse model, consistent with effects on lymphoid fate commitment.
In a post hoc analysis of subgroups, mean changes in spleen volume among patients with the JAK2V617F mutation were -34.6% in the ruxolitinib group and 8.1% in the placebo group; the corresponding changes among patients without the mutation were -23.8% and 8.4% (P value for interaction, 0.07).
Spliceosome component (P = 0.4) and ASXL1 mutations (P = 0.37) had no impact survival.
The intent of traditional induction chemotherapy is to produce a major reduction in the leukemic burden and to restore normal hematopoiesis.
GATA1 inhibits PU.1 by preventing its interaction with the co-activator c-JUN, whereas PU.1 blocks GATA1 function by inhibiting its ability to bind to DNA.
In patients older than 60 years, the proportion of those with favorable CBF translocations decreases, as does the number with isolated NPM1 mutations, whereas the number of those with unfavorable karyotypes and mutations increases.
These neutropenias may be isolated or associated with immunologic defects or extra-hematopoietic manifestations.
Clinical parameters studied included age, sex, overall survival (OS), blood counts, and metaphase cytogenetics.
The precise pathogenetic mechanisms associated with facilitation of clonal evolution remain unclear.
Figure 3. Unsplicing of specific genes because of spliceosomal mutations as detected by deep RNA sequencing. Next-generation-based RNA deep sequencing was used to quantitatively study splicing patterns. (A) The top panel shows the intron 5 and exon 6 boundary of TET2 (dotted line). Five reads correspond to transcripts that were not spliced (unspliced) and 4 were spliced at this boundary. The bottom panel shows read counts at the 5' and 3' splice sites of each intron (3-10) of TET2. White and black bars indicate the number of spliced and unspliced reads, respectively. In a case of AML with a U2AF1 mutation, more unspliced than spliced reads were observed at the 3' splice site of intron 5 (left panel), probably because of a loss of spliceosome function. However, unspliced RNAs were less frequent than spliced RNAs in WT RNA sequencing (right panel). (B) At both the 3' and 5' splice sites of RUNX1 intron 6, unspliced reads were more frequent than spliced reads in AML cases with U2AF1 and SRSF2 mutations. However, there were fewer unspliced transcripts at the same site in WT and SF3B1 mutant samples. Splicing abnormalities in the selected genes are summarized (bottom right), including the results presented in detail in supplemental Figures 7 and 8.
In the past 5 years, the presence of autosomal chromosome monosomies in AML has emerged as an important prognostic factor associated with extremely poor prognosis.
Discovery of frequent mutations of splicing machinery in myelodysplasia.
Conflicting data exist regarding the prognostic impact of TET2 mutations in MDS.
The current study seeks to improve upon these prognostic models by incorporating recently described molecular markers (somatic mutations), some of which have already been shown useful in the prognostic assessment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Samples were acquired from adult patients, who provided written informed consent, between 1994 and 2008 according to protocols approved by the institutional review board at each institution.
No correlation was observed between genes in the cohesin complex and other mutations such as FLT3-ITD, IDH1, IDH2, or NRAS mutations.
These analyses were performed using JMP9 (SAS, Cary, NC) and R-statistical language.
In STAG2, we detected mutations in 17 females (14 heterozygous and 3 homozygous) and in 44 males (hemizygous).
Association between mutations and clinical and biological features was assessed by the X2 test.
Informed consent was obtained according to protocols approved by the institutional review boards and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Exome sequencing.
Disease-free survival was 51% for related HLA-matched donors and 67% for unrelated donors.
In all patients except those at highest risk, the presence of these mutations is associated with an overall survival similar to that of patients in the next-highest IPSS risk group.
Using target gene sequencing technology, Gelsi-Boyer et al first identified ASXL1 mutations in 11% of MDS patients and 43% of patients with CMML.
The 2-year OS rate was 50% and 16%, respectively (P = .001).
The human GATA2 gene (13,760 kb), cloned by Lee et al is located on 3q21 and has 6 exons.
However, in AML, cohesin mutations have not been associated with aneuploidy or complex cytogenetics, suggesting an alternate mechanism of transformation.
Next-generation pyrosequencing of PCR-amplified exons of TET2, RUNX1, TP53, CDKN2A, PTEN, NPM1 exon 11, and CBL exons 8 and 9 was performed with the use of a next-generation sequencing platform (454 Life Sciences).
Studies have shown that c-KIT mutations are associated with decreased remission duration (eg, EFS and relapse-free survival) and decreased OS in both groups of patients with t(8;21) or inv(16).
In MDS/MPN, SRSF2 mutations were more common than U2AF1; however, U2AF1 mutations were associated with shorter survival (Figure 2B).
First, not all patients have mutations in class I or class II genes; as one example, class I mutations are only present in approximately 50% of patients with AML and, to date, genetic studies have not identified additional class I mutations in the remaining cases of AML.
Treatment of acute leukemia has been divided into induction chemotherapy and postremission (or consolidation) therapy.
Several studies demonstrate a mutation rate in de novo MDS of 6.4-12%.
Figure 1. Change in Spleen Volume. Panel A shows the results of the intention-to-treat analysis of the percentage of patients in each study group who reached the primary end point of a reduction of 35% or more in spleen volume as assessed by means of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT). Patients who discontinued the study drug before week 24 or crossed over before week 24 were counted as not having had a response. Only patients with baseline data were included in this analysis. I bars denote 95% confidence intervals. CI denotes confidence interval. Panel B shows the percent change from baseline in spleen volume at week 24 (in 139 patients in the ruxolitinib group and 106 in the placebo group) or at the last evaluation before week 24 (in 16 patients in the ruxolitinib group and 47 in the placebo group). Data for 1 patient with a missing baseline value are not included on the graph. Most patients in the ruxolitinib group (150 of 155) had a reduction in spleen volume, whereas most patients in the placebo group had either an increase in spleen volume (102 of 153 patients) or no change (15 of 153 patients). Panel C shows the median percent change in spleen volume as assessed by means of MRI or CT over time. Reductions in spleen volume were apparent at the first on-study measurement at 12 weeks and were maintained over the course of the study. The upper edge of each I bar corresponds to the 75th percentile, and the lower edge to the 25th percentile.
These drugs are expected to be more effective in the chronic phase of disease before increasing genetic complexity associated with disease transformation supervenes, and therapeutic inhibition of CSF3R-related signaling may be less relevant.
Although these mutations were common and found in a wide spectrum of myeloid diseases, some are strongly associated with specific phenotypic features, such as SF3B1 mutations with MDS or MDS/MPN with RS and SRSF2 mutations with CMML and advanced forms of MDS such as sAML and RA with excess blasts.
A 5-muL aliquot of each sample was loaded, and electrophoresis was carried out in a GenePhor Electrophoresis Unit using the GeneGel Excel 12.5/24 Kit.
Interestingly, prior to gene repression by GATA1, the SCL complex was frequently found to correlate with the presence of GATA2, suggesting that GATA2 might function via SCL to activate KIT and GATA2 expression in immature erythroid cells.
Chromosome 3 microsatellite genotyping.
We performed a survival analysis utilizing multiple clinical, pathological and molecular variables.
Figure 4. Three-tiered dynamic DIPSS-plus stratified survival data in 279 patients with PMF sub-stratified according to ASXL1 mutation status (a) and according to ASXL1/SRSF2/IDH1 mutation status (b).
Cohesin is a multiprotein complex that has an established role as an effector of sister-chromatid cohesin during metaphase.
In this cross-sectional analysis of the cohesin mutant cohort, STAG2 and SMC3 mutant clones were ancestral in only 18% of the cases.
International Prognostic Scoring System.
When the JAK2 V617F level of a particular patient falls below 1%, however, caution must be exercised, because very low levels of JAK2 V617F mutations (usually <0.1%) have been described in peripheral blood of unaffected individuals.
Our clinical trial protocol allowed an intent-to-treat analysis on the basis of donor availability in patients with CN-AML.
Mutation Analysis of PTEN/MMAC1 in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
Genomic DNA samples from 62 AML patients and 5 cell lines were examined. PCR-SSCP analysis of exon 5 showed abnormal bands in the cell line U937 (Fig. 3A).
To simplify the implementation of the score, we recoded it into 5 broader categories of adequate numerosity by pooling consecutive score values.
Postinduction Therapy : To judge the efficacy of the induction therapy, a bone marrow aspirate and biopsy should be performed 7 to 10 days after completion of induction therapy.
Her brother and parents are healthy.
This case, although anecdotal, provides a strong rationale for the investigation of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in CNL and aCML patients.
In a patient with sAML, we identified a somatic mutation (M1307I) in PRPF8 and a heterozygous mutation (R27X) in LUC7L2, respectively (Figure 1C).
When considering the type of CALR mutation, patients carrying a type 1 CALR mutation had a better OS compared with patients carrying JAK2 (V617F) (P <.001).
Fig. 2. 'GATA factor switching' and 'GATA switch' in erythropoiesis.  GATA2 has a role in the regulation of its own transcription binding to its promoter and working as an enhancer of its transcription.  During erythroid differentiation, expression of GATA1 is up-regulated and GATA1 replaces GATA2 at the same motifs and, as a result, inhibits GATA2 transcription.  The 'GATA switch' requires the interaction of different proteins, such as GATA1-FOG1 and FOG1-NuRD binding.
We reasoned that an integrated and comprehensive mutational analysis of the most commonly occurring mutations, performed in large well-characterized cohort of subjects with PMF, could allow to identify mutationally defined subgroups of patients resulting in improved prognosis assessment and providing a background for the interpretation of results obtained with conventional therapy, including allogeneic stem cell transplantation and particularly novel drugs.
Analysis of cohesin mutations.
The adverse prognostic value conferred by these factors was validated by the Dusseldorf model, with the exception of circulating IMC.
The father (patient number 7106; P4, II, 2) has the same mutation.
There was no difference in age (P = 0.6), gender (P = 0.23), hemoglobin values (P = 0.07), platelet count (P = 0.09), ALC (P = 0.79), PB (P = 0.5) and BM (0.27) blasts, WHO histological categories (P = 0.3) and the incidence of SRSF2 (P = 0.57) and SF3B1 (P = 0.43) mutations.
Overall survival was measured from the time of sample collection to the time of death from any cause; data were censored at the time patients were last known to be alive.
Thrombotic events were defined as described in detail by the CYTO-PV Collaborative Group.
Their role in the classification and diagnosis is yet to be established.
The C-terminal missense mutation has not been reported earlier and all of the earlier identified C-terminal mutations resulted in frameshifts.
Radiotherapy, especially in the context of myeloablative therapy (eg, total-body irradiation or radioimmunotherapy) given before autologous stem cell transplantation, may also increase the risk of therapy-related MDS/AML.
An explosion in the discovery and understanding of novel mutations in MDS has provided an important pathophysiologic and prognostic insight into this extraordinarily heterogeneous disease.
Conventional cytogenetic techniques detect large chromosomal aberrations in 40-60% of individuals with MDS, of which deletions of chromosome 5 or 5q (15%) and 7 or 7q (10%) are the most frequent.
In the ruxolitinib group, patients with new-onset grade 3 or 4 anemia had improvements in symptoms and reductions in spleen volume that were similar to those in patients without anemia (Fig. 9C and 9D in the Supplementary Appendix).
Multivariate analysis of OS was carried out by Cox regression.
Table 2. Univariate analysis for OS and RFS in AML patients (n = 389) according to cohesin gene mutation status.
In this analysis, median OS between the Intermediate I and Intermediate II groups were not as widely separated among patients aged 60 years and younger (13.6 vs. 18.7 months, respectively); in patients older than 60 years, median OS was similar between the 2 intermediate groups (9.5 vs. 9.2 months, respectively).
Besides, a cell-cycle-dependent regulation of both GATA2 expression and degradation has been demonstrated through its phosphorylation by CDK/cyclin systems at CDK consensus motifs (S/T0P+1), suggesting that hematopoietic-cell proliferation may be modulated by expression of GATA2 in tandem with cell-cycle regulators.
CtBP1 and -2 interact specifically with FOG1 through a motif located in the C-terminal half of FOG1; however, although transient transfection assays suggested that the FOG1/CtBP interaction is important for mediating transcriptional repression, mice harboring a mutant FOG1 with a disrupted CtBP-binding motif showed normal hematopoietic development, indicating that the FOG1/CtBP interaction is not required for FOG1 function in vivo.
JAK2V617 is present in more than 95% of patients with PV, and serum EPO levels are appropriately subnormal in more than 90% of patients.
To understand the role of these mutations in MDS pathogenesis, the effects of the mutant alleles on RNA splicing should be evaluated in more physiological conditions using primary hematopoietic cells.
A recent paper described a case of a SCN patient who acquired a CSF3R truncation mutation followed by a T618I point mutation (reported as T595I using the traditional CSF3R numbering system that does not include the signal peptide).
C-terminal mutations might be associated with a more frequent and rapid AML transformation.
Total white blood cells from the peripheral blood are the preferred type of cell population for these analyses.
Somatic mutations of SRSF2 (mainly at the proline 95 position) have been reported in MDS patients with an incidence of 11-15%.
For the purpose of this study, nonsynonymous variants known to be pathogenic, rare, or with unknown genotypic frequency variants in general population are included.
INTRODUCTION.
Large splenomegaly was defined as a spleen tip extending >10 cm from left costal margin, as previously reported.
Comparisons of proportions were performed by the x2 test and by Fisher's exact test, and differences in values and in ranks were assessed by Student t tests and Mann-Whitney U tests, respectively.
Age >65, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, leukocytosis > 25 x 109/L, circulating blasts > 1%, and presence of constitutional symptoms.
The gene encoded GATA binding protein 2 (globin transcription factor 2) (GATA2) is a transcription factor that is crucial for the proliferation and survival of hematopoietic cells.
The study design adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by our institutional review board before its initiation.
In contrast to earlier studies, our result, which included the largest cohort of CMML patients who had no earlier history of chemotherapy or radiotherapy, showed for the first time a very high frequency of RUNX1 mutations, which was comparable with those reported in atomic bomb survivors or in chemotherapy-related MDS.
In both cases, copy-number data and sequencing data reveal that these are loss-of-function, frequently heterozygous alterations that often occur in concert in the same patient sample.
Interestingly, the rate of CBL mutation was found to be significantly higher in secondary MDS compared with de novo MDS (11.7% versus 0.6%, respectively).
Individual parameters of independent significance for LT included PB blast count and AMC >10 x 109/l.
In a phase II study in patients aged 60 years and older (N = 55; median age, 74 years), the CR rate with this agent (20 mg/m2/d for 5 days) was 24% (including 6/24 patients [24%] with poor-risk cytogenetics), and the median EFS and OS were 6 and 8 months, respectively.
The loss of function for PTEN/MMAC1 appears to occur during the progression of multiple human cancers. PTEN/MMAC1 has also been identified as the gene responsible for Cowden disease, a rare familial syndrome associated with an elevated risk for tumors of the breast, thyroid, and skin, and BannayanZonana syndrome, a related harmartomatous polyposis syndrome.
The frequency of coexisting somatic mutations can yield insights into the molecular circuitry of a cancer.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous cluster of clonal hematopoietic neoplasms manifested by peripheral cytopenias, lineage dysplasia, and a predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia.
5hmC, an oxidation product of 5mC by the TET family of iron(II)/alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, is considered a novel and important epigenetic marker that constitutes the initial process of DNA demethylation pathway (Fig. 1).
Changes in symptoms recorded with the MFSAF were directionally consistent with the assessments made with other validated and common patient-reported outcome instruments used in this study.
Similarly, in a retrospective review of adult patients with AML treated on CALGB protocols (N = 1213), the 5-year survival rates for those with favorable, intermediate-risk, and poor-risk cytogenetics were 55%, 24%, and 5%, respectively.
Most patients with MDS have a detectable gene mutation, making its clinical implementation broadly applicable.
HLA typing of family members is recommended for patients younger than 60 years who do not have favorable-risk cytogenetics.
In the high-risk group, a donor search should begin while the patient is recovering from induction chemotherapy rather than waiting for remission to be achieved.
The decision to use high- versus standard-dose cytarabine for induction might be influenced by consolidation strategies; fewer high-dose consolidation cycles may be needed for patients induced with high-dose cytarabine or for those who will undergo early autologous HSCT.
Several in vivo experimental approaches have been explored to assess GATA2 function in hematopoiesis.
Similarly, the presence of SRSF2 or IDH1 mutations appears to predict leukemia independent of currently known risk factors including thrombocytopenia and unfavorable karyotype.
Among patients in whom the study drug was interrupted, symptoms (assessed by means of the total symptom score) returned to baseline levels over a period of approximately 1 week (Fig.
More recently, a large series of patients with MDS (N = 317) showed that the SF3B1 mutation status was not associated with time to AML progression or OS, regardless if all patients or only the subgroup of patients with RS were included in the analyses.
We therefore studied a cohort of 1060 patients with MDS, myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), MDS/MPN overlap syndromes, and primary and secondary AML (pAML and sAML, respectively) to elucidate the clinical characteristics of patients with myeloid neoplasms harboring cohesin mutations with respect to disease phenotype, genetic background, therapeutic response, and clinical outcome.
Over the last decade, genetic alterations in patients with MDS/CMML have been a subject of investigations.
Therefore, lower-risk patients with myelodysplastic syndromes who have EZH2 and ASXL1 mutations may require more aggressive treatment than would be predicted by the IPSS.
Based on data from a large study in elderly patients (N = 1406), patient and disease factors significantly associated with CR and/or early death were identified and risk scores were developed based on multivariate regression analysis.
Patient number 6183 (P7, II, 1) is a young girl with an initial presentation of neutropenia evolving to MDS associated with the loss of chromosome 7 (Table 1 and supplemental Table 2).
Among patients in the European cohort, 382 (79%) displayed at least one somatic mutation (see Supplementary Figure S4 for details); the frequency of individual mutations and their interrelationships are shown in Figure 1a.
MDS indicates myelodysplastic syndromes; RCUD, refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia; RCMD, refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia; MDS-U, MDS unclassifiable; RARS, refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts; RAEB, refractory anemia with excess blasts; MDS/MPN, MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasms; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; aCML, atypical chronic myeloid leukemia; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; RARS-T, RARS associated with marked thrombocytosis; PV, polycythemia vera; PMF, primary myelofibrosis; ET, essential thrombocythemia; and AML, acute myeloid leukemia.
Thirty-six patients in the placebo group (23.4%) crossed over to ruxolitinib (16 before and 20 after week 24; see the Supplementary Appendix.)
Summarizing this data and taking our previously published data into account we were able to detect at least one molecular mutation in 61/81 (75.3%) patients (Figure 1a).
Older adults with intact functional status (ie, ECOG score 0-2), minimal comorbidity, and favorable cytogenetic or molecular mutations, may benefit from standard therapies regardless of chronologic age.
Studies have shown significantly decreased OS outcomes among patients with DNMT3A mutations compared with those with the wild-type gene (median OS, 12-21 vs. 40-41 months).
In follow-up sequencing of an expanded cohort of 29 patients from the New England Journal of Medicine report, 21% have exhibited both CSF3R and SETBP1 mutations, with 31% of samples having CSF3R mutations only and 7% with SETBP1 mutations only (Figure 1).
Over the last several years, our knowledge of genes being mutated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients has not only expanded due to the results of next generation and whole genome sequencing efforts, but we have also learned that mutations in AML occur in specific pathways.
In first complete remission, he received a matched unrelated donor hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) and is still in remission 18 months after the allograft.
The presence of large hyperlobulated and mature-appearing megakaryocytes without erythroid or granulocyte proliferation is diagnostic for ET according to the WHO guidelines, but reliability may depend on skilled hematopathologists.
The median spleen volume was more than 2500 cm3 (>10 times the median normal spleen volume of 200 cm3).
DFS rate (for patients with a CR) and OS rate (for all patients) at 4 years was not significantly different between treatment arms.
The primary end point was the proportion of patients with a reduction of 35% or more in spleen volume from baseline to week 24, measured by means of magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography.
His younger brother (patient number 6331; P4, III, 2) presented recurrent otitis during infancy and had a long period of extensive warts since the age of 12.
These results are also consistent with previous suggestions that mutations affecting epigenetic regulation might be prognostically more relevant than those involved with JAK-STAT signaling.
It is known that germline mutations lead to cohesinopathies that are characterized by growth and developmental disorders in regard to the role of cohesin genes in the pathogenesis of human disease.
PATIENTS, MATERIALS, AND METHODS.
The karyotype identified a translocation involving MLL along with a monosomy 7.
He presented with an Aspergillus infection during induction therapy and died from severe respiratory distress.
In subject 87, we found a monoallelic microdeletion of 130 kb at 7q36.1.
Median remission duration was 45 months for the high-dose arm, compared with 12 months for the standard treatment arm.
Whether the same set of genes is subject to altered epigenetic patterning in DNMT3A-mutant AML cells has not been investigated.
However, other studies demonstrated that the presence of cohesin mutations did not have a negative impact on survival or response to treatment in AML.
This Special Article also points to future directions for genomic testing in BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms.
We next investigated associations of distinct mutations, however, no specific pattern was observed, that is, EZH2 mutations were detected in combination with TET2 alterations (4/10), ASXL1 (3/10), RUNX1 (3/10), CBL (2/10), JAK2 (2/10), NRAS (2/10), KRAS (1/10) and IDH2 (1/10), respectively (Figure 1a).
A matched unrelated donor search (including cord blood) should be initiated for high-risk patients who would be candidates for HSCT in first CR, or considered at first relapse in appropriate patients concomitant with initiation of reinduction therapy.
In addition, the recent discovery of frequent mutations of epigenetic regulators engaged in DNA methylation (DNMT3A, TET2, and IDH1/2) and histone modifications (ASXL1 and EZH2 and other components of Polycomb complex 2) in MDS suggested a central role of a compromised epigenetic regulation in their pathogenesis.
Greater efforts in this regard, coupled with advances in epigenomic platforms, will help to gain greater insight into the role of these mutations in MDS, MPN and AML.
Table 1. Mutations in epigenetic modifiers in myeloid malignancies.
Heterozygous mutations largely present with a mutually exclusive pattern.
Mortality for splenectomy in PMF is 5%-10%.
SF3B1.
In addition to RUNX1 and CEBPA mutations, monosomy 7 was associated with pure familial MDS/AML in 14 pedigrees with an autosomal-dominant transmission and a young age (< 18 years).
The reaction was then stopped by heat inactivation at 95--degrees--C for 5 min.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
A number of conclusions can be reached, taking these data together.
JAK2FV617F allelic burden was only decreased 13% in bone marrow and 9% in peripheral blood from baseline.
Data were analyzed using our in-house pipeline for somatic mutation calling (Genomon) as previously described (http://genomon. hgc.jp/exome/en/index.html).
INTRODUCTION.
Although there are small-molecule inhibitors for JAK2, such as ruxolitinib [approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for myelofibrosis], these target the JAK2 and often the JAK1 proteins, and thus are not specific for the V617F mutation.
A subsequent post hoc analysis of OS with additional follow-up time showed the same median OS with a statistically significant advantage associated with decitabine (HR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.68-0.99; P = .03).
In subject 73 (who harbored a heterozygous splice-donor-site mutation in intron 12), only wild-type mRNA was detected.
The second most frequently mutated genes in the cohesin complex were SMC3 and STAG2, and we found 5 patients with these mutations, respectively.
The primary end point was the proportion of patients with a reduction in spleen volume of 35% or more at 24 weeks, assessed by means of magnetic resonance imaging.
Patients with nonmutated JAK2 and MPL were studied for CALR exon 9 mutations as reported in our original article or by Sanger sequencing, as described elsewhere.
Significantly decreased OS with DNMT3A mutations has also been reported in the subgroup of patients with NK-AML with wild-type NPM1 with or without FLT3-ITD or NPM1 mutation in the presence of FLT3-ITD, but not in the favorable subgroup with NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD.
Association between categorical variables (2-way tables) was tested by the Fisher exact test.
Mutational analysis of the entire 9 coding exons showed that only one cell line (U937) had a frameshift mutation resulting in premature termination of the PTEN/MMAC1 protein.
Aberrant expression of differentiation antigens present at diagnosis may allow tracking of residual blasts through flow cytometry in follow-up samples that may appear normal according to conventional morphology.
All candidate mutations identified on mass-spectrometric genotyping were validated with the use of redesigned assays in nonamplified or independently amplified DNA specimens from the study patients with the use of homogeneous Mass-Extend (hME) chemistry, as described previously.
Our results indicate that the PTEN/MMAC1 gene may play a role in a small percentage of AML, but its significance needs to be further evaluated.
Clinically verified MPL mutations are listed in Table 2.
Notably, the prognostic relevance of ASXL1 mutations was mostly restricted to patients with either intermediate-2 risk (P = 0.03) or intermediate-1 plus low-risk disease (P = 0.07) unlike high-risk disease (P = 0.78) (Figure 4a).
The presence of JAK2 V617F mutation did not affect blood counts or clinical outcomes between patients with and without JAK2 V617F.
The PRC2 protein complex is an essential regulator of embryonic and hematopoietic stem cells, required during cell differentiation, for maintaining cell identity and proliferation, and for stem-cell plasticity.
Affymetrix 250K and 6.0 Kit (Affymetrix) were used.
JAK2V617F is the best characterized mutation in BCR-ABL1-negative MPN.
No significant differences were observed in EFS, DFS, or OS outcomes between treatment arms.
Known single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), intronic polymorphisms more than six bases from a splice junction, and silent mutations were excluded from further analysis.
Cox proportional hazard regression model was used for multivariable analysis.
IPSS and DIPSS risks were estimated as previously described.
DNA METHYLATION.
Another hypomethylating agent, decitabine, has also been evaluated as remission induction therapy for older patients with AML.
Evidence that accounting for JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status improves the risk stratification provided by IPSS.
Both azacytidine and decitabine are approved by the FDA as treatment for patients with MDS.
In all cases, hematologic parameters fluctuated with time, except for monocytes, which remained low.
An identical mutational variant of SETBP1 has also been described in Schinzel-Giedion midface retraction syndrome.
The exon 12 mutations and the V617F mutation are mutually exclusive; either V617F or exon 12 mutations are present in virtually all cases of PV.
UTX, in conjunction with the other epigenetic genes (e.g., EZH2), regulates histone methylation.
RNA Extraction and Reverse Transcription.
RARS-T: refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts with thrombocytosis, a subtype of mixed myelodysplasia and myeloproliferative neoplasm.
Patients with ET are risk stratified in the same manner as those with PV (Table 5).
RESULTS.
This criterion provides a measure of the relative goodness of fit of a statistical model and a means for comparison among models, a lower AIC value indicating a better tradeoff between fit and complexity.
The role of cytogenetics in the classification of MPN is less defined than for the pathognomonic t(9;22) karyotype of CML.
In 1951, Dameshek organized chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and primary myelofibrosis (PMF) into an inclusive disease category that he termed "myeloproliferative disorders" (MPD).
Workup.
The DNMT3A mutations have been reported in 18% to 22% of patients with AML, with a frequency of 29% to 34% in those with NK-AML.
To better understand the role of GATA2, further studies addressed to identify the downstream targets that mediate the effects of this transcription factor would be needed.
JAK2.
Therefore, deregulation of these processes is intimately linked to hematopoietic disorders and may result in leukemia.
Only the mutation in R381Q of SMC3 was recurrent in 2 patients, whereas all other mutations were only identified once (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 4).
A diagnosis of PV can be made when JAK2 V617F or exon 12 mutation is detected, along with increased hemoglobin and low or normal levels of erythropoietin.
Unlike granulocyte isolation, optimization in a PCR procedure does not increase time, labor, or cost on a routine basis.
Anemia and thrombocytopenia were the most frequent hematologic adverse events (overall and grade 3 or 4 events) (Table 2) and a reason for treatment discontinuation in one patient in each study-drug group for each event.
In our cohort, we identified mutations in genes of the cohesin complex in 23 AML patients (5.9%).
Because the allele burden varies between MPN entities or between patients at diagnosis and after treatment, samples with a low allelic frequency should be included.
CSF3R truncation mutations result in a loss of a portion of the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor, suggesting possible molecular mechanisms for receptor activation.
Within "higher-risk" subjects (Figure 5B), CALR-mutant patients had a better OS compared with all the remaining genetic subgroups (P = .023 compared with JAK2-mutant, P = .003 compared with MPL-mutant, and P = .001 compared with triple-negative patients).
For the purposes of comparison, results were grouped as high (>50%), moderate (5% to 50%), low (2% to 5%), and negative (<2%).
In line with other studies, cohesin mutations were not associated with an increase in the frequency of complex cytogenetic abnormalities.
The strongest correlation was found in PMF, where 33% of 109 patients had cytogenetic abnormalities, including +8, 13q-, 20q-, and abnormalities of chromosomes 1, 7, and 9.
Figure 1. EZH2 is recurrently affected in individuals with MDS. (a) Genomic aberrations of chromosome 7 detected in 102 individuals with MDS by high-resolution SNP arrays. Numbers on the right are unique patient numbers. Two subjects carried large areas of UPD (blue bars), 14 carried deletions (red bars) and 6 showed duplications (green bars, asterisk represents four different subjects). Subject 87 showed a 130-kb microdeletion at 7q36.1, which contains CUL1 and EZH2.  CNA, copy number alterations; UPD, uniparental disomy. (b) Protein localization of ten different EZH2 point mutations found in 8 out of 126 subjects with MDS.  The ruler indicates amino acids. The catalytic SET domain, a C-rich domain and the two SANT domains are indicated. Numbers in the boxes indicate unique patent numbers (UPN)
Subgroups.
In the placebo group, patients with and those without grade 3 or 4 anemia had worsening of symptoms, which was greater in patients with anemia.
Five patients had more than one episode of grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia.
Postremission or Consolidation Therapy: Although successful induction therapy clears the visible signs of leukemia in the marrow and restores normal hematopoiesis in patients with de novo AML, additional postremission therapy (ie, consolidation) is needed to reduce the residual abnormal cells to a level that can be contained by immune surveillance.
French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry.
Mutation descriptors are not translated into the standard Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) nomenclature, to avoid misinterpretation.
On the basis of these findings, we screened other rationally selected genes within the spliceosomal machinery in patients with MDS and related disorders (n = 120).
Undoubtedly, cell division is one of the key processes for every tumor cell including AML blasts due to the increased proliferation potential of malignant cells.
Study Design And treatment.
GATA2 is degraded through ubiquitination-proteasome-dependent systems and three regions located in the non-finger areas (amino acids 1--70, 153--256 and 412--480) appear to be important for its degradation.
Until these recent results were obtained, spliceosomal dysfunction was only rarely associated with malignant transformation.
NPM1 mutations can occur concurrently with FLT3-ITD, and patients who have both genetic lesions have an outcome more similar to those with isolated FLT3-ITD mutations.
These results were confirmed after adjusting for time-dependent DIPSS, with a better OS of patients with type 1 CALR mutation compared with those with JAK2 (V617F) (HR 2.01, P = .04), and no difference between patients with type 1 and those with type 2 CALR mutation, as well as between patients with type 2 CALR mutation and those with JAK2 (V617F).
Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) testing for monitoring JAK2 V617F allele burden has been limited to patients enrolled in clinical trials such as the peg-IFN-a-2a and MF-TG101348-001 trials.
These findings show that ruxolitinib is an effective therapy for myelofibrosis.
The disease course of therapy-related MDS/AML is generally progressive and may be more resistant to conventional cytotoxic therapies than de novo cases of MDS/AML.
INTRODUCTION.
Recently, a more diverse range of missense, nonsense and frameshift mutations in EZH2 were identified in patients with myeloid malignancies, most commonly PRC2 complex in MDS, CMML and primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and rarely in other chronic or acute myeloid malignancies (FIG. 2; TABLE 1).
CBL.
The deficiency of ABCB7 protein is related to mitochondrial iron overload, reduced heme synthesis at earlier phase of erythroid precursors, and ineffective erythropoiesis.
These patients should be considered for a clinical trial, allogeneic HSCT with matched sibling or matched unrelated donor, or best supportive care.
The presence of STAG2 mutation appeared to be associated with adverse clinical outcome and an increase in bone marrow blasts.
Besides, an essential contribution of GATA2 to urogenital development has been shown.
The mutant enzymes are not catalytically inactive.
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is classified as one of the subtypes of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) in the French-American-British system, whereas according to the World Health Organization classification, CMML is categorized to be an MDS/myeloproliferative disease rather than MDS per se.
SURVEY OF MUTATIONS IN THE STUDY SAMPLES.
In general, high ALC have been associated with favorable outcomes in hematological malignancies, and its inclusion as an adverse prognosticator in the MDAPS is perplexing.
The period taken into account was the time interval from birth to the first date when the event was observed or when no event occurred to the last examination.
A 'two-hit' model of leukemogenesis of AML, that is, cooperation of class I mutations that drive proliferation and class II mutations that lead to differentiation block in leukemic cells, has been proposed.
Besides, it is known that an E-box-WGATAR composite element residing within a GATA2 intron (9.5 kb downstream of the transcription start site) confers strong enhancer activity in GATA2-expressing cells in vitro and in the vasculature and fetal liver of mouse embryos.
Recently, other common molecular lesions with prognostic impact have been identified in patients with AML.
Similar results were obtained when only considering patients with de novo AML (n = 348) with the exclusion of patients with secondary AML (OS: HR 0.96; 95% CI, 0.54-1.73; P = .89; supplemental Figure 2A), (RFS: HR 0.62; 95% CI, 0.3-1.25; P = .18; supplemental Figure 2B), and (CR: mutated 82% vs wild-type 78%; P = .65).
Management of AML in Patients Younger Than 60 Years.
A total of 617 patients with PMF were recruited from 4 centers: 187 from the Department of Hematology Oncology and 171 from the Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis (Pavia, Italy), 163 from the University Hospital (Florence, Italy), and 96 from the Hospital Clinic (Barcelona, Spain).
In subject 97, a point mutation was found that was homozygous due to UPD, and in subject 96, two different point mutations were found that resided on two different alleles (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Additionally, similar to our observations in CNL/aCML, SCN patients can acquire compound CSF3R mutations.
The estimated 2-year AML transformation free was 21% for mutation-positive patients and 55% for mutationnegative patients.
AT A GLANCE.
On the other hand, it has been recently shown that the -2.8 kb site confers maximal Gata2 expression in HSCs and progenitors in specific contexts, demonstrating that the -2.8 kb site is not required for initiation or maintenance of Gata2 repression during erythroid differentiation.
Induction Therapy: The creation of separate guidelines for patients older than 60 years recognizes the poor outcomes in this group treated with standard cytarabine and an anthracycline.
However, when each one of the four mutations was individually evaluated in the context of DIPSS-plus, only ASXL1 mutations remained significant (HR: 1.4, 95% CI: 1.0-1.9; P = 0.04).
What Are the Technical Issues Associated with JAK2 and MPL Mutation Testing?
When comparing patients with reduced expression or mutation of STAG2 to patients with intact expression of WT STAG2, we identified 28 genes, which were differentially expressed in patients with STAG2 alterations regardless of whether this was due to somatic mutations or transcriptional downregulation (supplemental Table 13).
Conclusions.
Moreover, FLT3-TKD mutation as the sole genetic aberration or occurring concurrently with t(15;17)/PML-RARA (underlying lesion in the APL subtype) or with FLT3-ITD (FLT3 double mutation) has been associated with poorer outcomes.
This suggests that mutation in early stem cells may confer an advantage in clonal evolution.
RUNX1 mutations have rarely been reported in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML).
Hydroxyurea also has been shown to effectively reduce the JAK2V617 allelic burden (molecular remission), although the long-term implications of this remain unclear.
Cytogenetic analysis was performed according to standard banding techniques on the basis of 20 metaphases.
Adverse effects included thrombocytopenia, anemia, and a rapid return of symptoms after discontinuation of therapy.
RAS mutations are frequent events in CMML.
ABSTRACT.
Biomarkers.
The mutated genes are primarily engaged in the 3'-splice site recognition during pre-mRNA processing, leading to abnormal RNA splicing and ineffective hematopoiesis.
The GATA1 and GATA2 genes are regulated through dynamic changes in the occupancy by GATA factors of GATA motifs in their regulatory regions, so that there must be a switch controlled by GATA factors in GATA1 and GATA2 gene expression.
An early study showed detected missense point mutations of p53 have been detected in 3 of 44 patients with high-grade MDS (2 RAEB and 1 RAEB-T/AML).
However, a frameshift mutation in exon 7 (703delGinsAA, nomenclature as described in ref. 5) introducing a premature stop codon was found in EZH2 (Table 1, Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3).
IPSS- or DIPSS-plus-independent prognostic value was also demonstrated by classifying patients into mutationally 'high' or 'low' risk groups defined as the respective presence or absence of at least one of the aforementioned mutations that were prognostically relevant for either overall or leukemia-free survival.
Moreover, in our cases with normal karyotype AML, GATA2 overexpression was significantly associated with other molecular markers in AML as FLT3-ITD and NPM1 mutations, and EVI1 and WT1 overexpression.
EZH2 mutations may also co-occur with TET2 mutations and have been frequently found in high-grade MDS.
Similarly, the Gata2 knock-out mouse has profound defects in definitive hematopoiesis: Gata2-deficient embryos die of anemia at day 10-11 of gestation, and show defects in the self-renewal and proliferation capacity of HSC.
Total RNA was purified as described previously or using a commercial kit (TRIzol Reagent, GIBCOBRL, NY). The extracted RNA was treated with RNasefree DNase I. cDNA was synthesized from 1 mug of total RNA.
In summary, cohesin mutations, which likely result in loss of function, are recurrent molecular genetic events in both solid and hematopoietic tumors.
Additional MPL mutations have since been described at the same locus, with an overall MPL515 mutational frequency estimated at 4% for ET and 11% for PMF.
GATA2 mutations are indicated as protein (first line) or nucleotide (second line) variations. Complete blood count was collected during routine at baseline before HSCT in absence of clonal hematopoiesis.
Five laboratories also offered JAK2 exon 12 assays, two laboratories offered MPL mutation assays, and another two provided MPL mutation results (although their assays were still being validated).
The male patients had a functionally homozygous mutation for STAG2 and SMC1A.
Although variations exist between institutional standards and practices, several supportive care issues are important to consider in the management of patients with AML.
The TET family of proteins was first identified with the cloning of TET1 as a fusion partner of MLL in patients with t(10;11)(q22;q23) AML.
Although several mutational studies of ASXL1 have been impaired by the inclusion of nonsomatic variants, mutations in ASXL1 are associated with poor outcome in patients with MDS and in patients with AML.
This reversible modification is thought to be associated with transcriptional repression.
Thus JAK2-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of PRMT5 and histone H3-Y41 can lead to direct alterations in epigenetic patterning.
The high-risk molecular group is defined as either NPM1-wild-type/FLT3-ITD-negative, or NPM1-wild-type/FLT3-ITD-positive, or NPM1-mutated/FLT3-ITD-positive. The low-risk molecular group is defined by the presence of an NPM1 mutation and the absence of FLT3-ITD.
Although the results of clinical correlative studies have not been uniform, in the largest series, TET2 mutations were associated with poorer prognosis in patients with favourable-risk, cytogenetically normal AML (CN-AML), whereas studies have failed to demonstrate a consistent prognostic relevance of TET2 mutations in patients with MPN or MDS.
This first involved variant allelic frequency (VAF) analyses of cooccurring mutations in samples, adjusted for copy number.
The postanalytic components include interpretive comments, if needed.
We identified 7 different GATA2 mutations in 14 patients coming from 7 pedigrees (Figure 1).
Similarly, 15 out of 20 RAD21 sequence alterations were nonsense (n = 2), frameshift (n = 11), or splice site (n = 2) mutations causing low expression of the gene; 5 were missense mutations.
ETS1, likewise involved in megakaryocyte development, increases during megakaryocyte maturation, and its overexpression is associated with enhanced differentiation and upregulation of GATA2 and other megakaryocyte-specific genes.
No genome-wide increase in intron retention was observed in the patients with mutations.
Severe infections were defined as those that would be life-threatening without appropriate antibiotic or antifungal therapy.
Although the remission rates are similar for high- and standard-dose cytarabine, 2 studies have shown more rapid marrow blast clearance after 1 cycle of high-dose therapy and a DFS advantage for patients aged 50 years or younger who received the high-dose therapy.
Moreover, GATA2 is crucial for the proliferation and maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells and multipotential progenitors.
In mice, Gata1 null defects in erythroid cells can be partially rescued by knocking in Gata3 into the endogenous Gata1 locus.
A number of AML cell lines are positive for JAK2 V617F, including HEL, MB-02, MUTZ-8, SET-2, UKE-1.
RUNX1 is also known as AML1 and acts to regulate the expression of various genes specific for hematopoiesis, including G-CSF, IL-3, T-cell receptor and myeloperoxidase.
RNA SPLICING.
Complications may occur as infectious diseases, but also less frequently as myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
ABSTRACT.
The libraries were then submitted for Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencing according to standard procedures.
Instead, Li et al found BCORL1 to be mutated by searching for recurrent mutations in a discovery cohort of 8 patients with secondary AML (s-AML) that were subjected to whole-exome sequencing.
The first is to characterize the disease process based on factors such as 1) prior toxic exposure, 2) antecedent myelodysplasia, and 3) karyotypic or molecular abnormalities, which may provide prognostic information that could impact responsiveness to chemotherapy and risk of relapse.
Patients were registered in the French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry, which was established in 1993 to collect data from 35 pediatric hematology-oncology clinical units.
MDS subtypes of refractory anemia (RA), RA with ringed sideroblasts, and refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia were classified as low-risk MDS.
For those with significant residual blasts or clear-cut induction failure, escalation to high-dose cytarabine with or without an anthracycline is the most common salvage strategy.
PCR amplifications were carried out as described previously.
Differential expression analysis for this data set was performed using the Bioconductor DESeq2 package.
As would be expected, allogeneic HSCT was associated with a significantly higher rate of nonrelapse mortality (36% vs. 4%; P < .001) at 3 years; the 3-year OS rate was not significantly different between the groups (37% vs. 25%; P = .08), although a trend was seen favoring allogeneic HSCT.
The role of mutations in epigenetic regulators in myeloid malignancies.
Recent work demonstrated that ectopic overexpression of EZH2 also results in myeloid transformation, implying that EZH2 may serve as both an oncogene and a tumour suppressor gene in the myeloid compartment.
The cumulative incidence of marked leukocytosis was significantly lower in CALR-mutant patients compared with JAK2-mutant (P = .004) or triple-negative patients (P <.001).
DNMT3L binds to histone H3 tails in the absence of K4 methylation, which leads to the recruitment of DNMT3A activity to specific loci.
Our results showed that 16.7% of CMML patients with RUNX1 mutations had FLT3 or RAS mutations.
Many institutions also use HLA typing to select platelet donors for allogeneic HSCT.
Growth factors have no clear role in initial induction therapy; however, they may be considered as part of supportive care for postremission therapy.
In fact, this identification has split PMF patients with nonmutated JAK2 and MPL (about one-third of all patients with PMF) into 2 distinct subtypes (Figure 7): (1) CALR-mutant PMF, a condition with an indolent clinical course and (2) PMF with nonmutated JAK2, CALR, and MPL, a very aggressive myeloid neoplasm.
Previously, we applied SNP arrays on a cohort of 102 subjects to identify genomic aberrations in MDS.
Although detection of JAK2 V617F and MPL mutations in the appropriate clinical settings confirms the diagnosis of ET or PMF, absence of the mutations does not rule out disease.
The fragments were loaded and amplified with the SOLiD sequencing control beads during emulsion polymerase chain reaction.
4.2. THE 'GATA SWITCH' IN MAST CELLS.
Equivalent antithrombotic efficacy with low-dose aspirin (100 mg/day) has now been demonstrated and is currently recommended for all patients diagnosed with PV regardless of risk profile and in the absence of contraindications.
The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate survival rates.
For comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis, genomic DNA samples were analyzed for copy number changes using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 arrays (for pedigree 1) or CytoScan HD arrays (for other pedigrees when material was available).
Emberger (an autosomal dominant primary lymphedema with predisposition to AML) and MonoMAC (monocytopenia with Mycobacterium avium complex) syndromes are the two common inherited diseases that appear to be associated with GATA2 mutations.
A multivariate analysis revealed that shorter survival was associated with older age (>65 years), female gender, leukocyte count >50 x 109/L, and the presence of immature circulating precursors.
It is responsible for removing small, non-helix-distorting base lesions from the genome.
The model reported in Figure 6 was developed with the only objective of showing, as a proof of concept, that genetic data can significantly improve prognostication of PMF.
Therefore, if other World Health Organization major and minor diagnostic criteria are met, finding such a low-positive JAK2 mutation may still be clinically relevant.
CR, complete remission; HI-E, hematologic improvement (erythroid); IWG, International Working Group; PR, partial remission; SD, stable disease.
In 2 cases of sAML that evolved from RAEB, cohesin mutations were observed only after transformation to AML (Figure 4A-B), indicating these mutations can occur as a late event that is associated with AML transformation.
These studies revealed that deletion of Dnmt3a resulted in progressive expansion of the long-term haematopoietic stem cell (LT-HSC) pool without increasing HSC proliferation or altering haematopoietic differentiation.
The selection criteria were the absence of mutations for the major genes involved in congenital neutropenia (ELANE, CXCR4, SBDS, HAX1, and G6PC3; n = 288 patients) and the presence of clinical features associated with GATA2 mutations: leg lymphedema, warts, and evolution to MDS/AML.
Similar studies that map 5-hmC localization in the haematopoietic system, and the identity of specific TET2 target genes in haematopoietic cells, have not been reported to date.
Peroxisomes.
In the 2008 WHO classification, the category of AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities was expanded to include the following: t(9;11)(p22;q23), t(6;9) (p23;q34) (provisional entity), inv(3)(q21;q26.2) or inv(3;3)(q21;q26.2) (provisional entity), and t(1;22)(p13;q13) (provisional entity), in addition to the previously recognized t(8;21)(q22;q22); inv(16) (p13;1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); and t(15;17) (q22;q12) [APL subtype].
Seishi Ogawa.
SETBP1 is mutated at lower frequencies in unclassified MDS/MPN (10%) and CMML (4%), but no SETBP1 mutations are found in AML, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, or solid tumors.
Mutations in TP53, NRAS, RUNX1, TET2, and IDH1 and IDH2 have each been reported to influence overall survival in univariate analyses.
EZH2 mutations, which have not previously been associated with known prognostic markers, retained a strong association with survival in our model.
The median OS for all patients was 17 months.
In exploring the effects of cohesin downmodulation/mutations on expression pattern in cohort, we noted a consistent down-modulation of DCK in patients with cohesin complex alterations.
U2AF1 mutations are detected in approximately 8% of patients with MDS.
Sensitivity analyses were performed on CR and RFS, and results are displayed for exploratory purposes.
This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial was conducted at 89 sites in the United States, Australia, and Canada.
Figure 4.  Overall Survival, According to International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) Risk Category and Mutational Status.  Panel A shows the overall survival of patients within each IPSS risk group.  Panel B shows the overall survival of patients with mutations in one or more of the five prognostic genes (TP53, EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, or ASXL1) as compared with patients without such mutations.  Panels C through F show the overall survival of patients according to the presence and absence of prognostic mutations and according to IPSS risk group.  In Panels C, D, and E, the overall-survival curve for patients in the next-highest IPSS risk group is included for the purpose of comparison.  In Panel F, the comparison curve is for patients in the next-lowest IPSS risk group.  P values were calculated for the log-rank comparison of overall survival between patients with mutations and those without mutations for the given IPSS risk group.  The IPSS risk classification, which is based on the percentage of blasts in bone marrow, the karyotype, and the number of cytopenias (Table 2 in the Supplementary Appendix), was recalculated for 428 of the 439 samples at the time of bone marrow sample collection (the IPSS classification could not be recalculated for 11 samples).
The use of aspirin in reducing thrombotic complications in ET is less defined than for PV, because no formal clinical trials have been conducted.
We subsequently screened a large cohort of patients (n = 310) with MDS and related disorders (including the initially screened 120 cases) in a stepwise fashion to determine the frequency of spliceosomal mutations discovered in the index cases.
A recent study reported that in younger patients (age < 60 years) with NK-AML, presence of DNMT3A mutations was associated with significantly decreased OS compared with the wild-type gene (5-year OS rate, 23% vs. 45%; P = .02).
Mutations in enzymatic modifiers represent attractive targets for directed therapy in myeloid malignancies.
Although this study was designed for evaluation of treatment in patients with high-risk MDS (based on FAB criteria), 113 study patients (32%) fulfilled criteria for AML using the 2008 WHO classification, with marrow-blast percentage between 20% and 30%.
In an open-label randomized phase III study, decitabine was compared with physician's choice (either low-dose cytarabine or supportive care) in older patients (age >= 65 years) with newly diagnosed AML.
Patients had disease that was refractory to available therapies, had side effects requiring their discontinuation, or were not candidates for available therapies and had disease requiring treatment.
Although patients older than 75 years with significant comorbidities generally do not benefit from conventional chemotherapy treatment, the rare patient with favorable or normal karyotype and no significant comorbidities might be the exception to this dogma.
Moreover, BCOR increases the repression of transcriptional activity by interacting with class I and II HDACs, the polycomb group protein PCGF1/NSPC1 and the histone demethylase FBXL10, which implies BCOR may suppress gene transcription by epigenetic mechanisms.
Leptomeningeal involvement is much less frequent (< 3%) in patients with AML than in those with ALL; therefore, the panel does not recommend LP as part of the routine diagnostic workup.
The frequent evolution to MDS and AML of patients with GATA2 mutations reveals the importance of screening for this mutation in chronic neutropenia, especially when associated with monocytopenia because of frequent hematopoietic transformation, variable clinical expression at onset, and the need of aggressive strategy therapy in patients with poor clinical outcome.
DISCUSSION.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by high molecular heterogeneity.
Interestingly, mutations in this complex were mutually exclusive, similar to other mutations that belonged to 1 pathway similar to genes of the spliceosome complex or mutations in IDH1, IDH2, and TET2.
Matched buccal DNA was available for 219 (49.9%) of the 439 samples analyzed in this study.
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY.
Thus, for this subgroup of patients, high-dose cytarabine followed by autologous HSCT should be the preferred HSCT option, and allogeneic HSCT may be better reserved as salvage therapy or for those with c-KIT mutations.
Overall and leukemia-free survival curves were prepared by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared by the log-rank test.
A recent large cohort study of 430 MDS patients also demonstrated that the mutation was associated with poor prognosis in MDS.
On the basis of such findings, PTEN/MMAC1 has been considered a candidate tumor suppressor gene that may play a role in varied malignancies. Chromosome 10q23.3 is deleted in a variety of primary tumors including myeloid leukemia.
Among patients who received ruxolitinib, anemia and thrombocytopenia were the most common adverse events, but they rarely led to discontinuation of the drug (in one patient for each event).
Our data showed that the locations of RUNX1 mutations in CMML patients were similar to those observed in therapy-related MDS/AML rather than in de novo MDS/AML.
Inappropriate expression of GATA2 has been observed in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome, related to severe dysplasia.
Patients.
There is a lack of well-established consensus concerning common analytical issues, such as what specimen type should be tested, whether it is clinically relevant to differentiate heterozygous from homozygous mutations, whether granulocyte enrichment should be performed, how to interpret a low level of a positive result, and whether quantitative results should be used and reported (and, if yes, in which disease type and in what clinical condition).
No mutations were observed in any of the AML or other tumor cell lines.
All except SET-2 are homozygous mutant, but some (eg, HEL) have more than two copies of JAK2 and as such are not ideal as standards.
Of the 22 laboratories, 13 used in-house tests for JAK2 V617F and the remaining 9 used commercial assays; 14 laboratories performed only qualitative assays, 5 performed only quantitative assays, and 3 performed both quantitative and qualitative assays.
Scores ranged from 0 ("absent" symptoms) to 10 ("worst imaginable" symptoms), and the total symptom score was the sum of the individual scores, excluding inactivity.
Idarubicin, which has a longer intracellular retention time, used at doses of 12 mg/m2 x 3 days, has had comparable remission rates with fewer patients requiring additional therapy at day 15 to achieve remission.
Samples from the European cohort, collected at time of diagnosis, were analyzed for mutations in ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, TET2, DNMT3A, CBL, IDH1, IDH2, MPL and JAK2.
One-hundred and fifty (66%) patients had a diploid karyotype, whereas 11 (5%) had no Y chromosome.
RARS: refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts.
Thirty-five percent of patients who received a low dose and 59% who received a high dose showed >50% reduction in splenomegaly overall.
Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology.
The remarkable differences in clinical course and outcomes observed among the diverse genetic subtypes suggest that, in spite of similar clinical features (bone marrow fibrosis, abnormal stem cell trafficking, and myeloid metaplasia), the disease biology varies considerably according to the different genetic lesions.
For survival analyses, end points were death and the first episode of cancer.
Because the clinical presentation of pedigree 1 was initially chronic neutropenia, we investigated the presence of mutations of GATA2 in the French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry.
Other relatively common mutations include R541_E543delinsK (approximately 10%), E543_D544del (approximately 10%), F537_K539delinsL (approximately 10%), K539L (approximately 10%), H538_K539delinsL (approximately 5%), and I540_E543delinsMK (approximately 5%).
Bone marrow proliferation of pleomorphic, loosely clustered megakaryocytes with unique stromal changes and without maturation defects is commonly seen in PV but is not diagnostic.
Conceivably, inv, i(17q) or monosomal karyotype were identified as predictors of a >80% 2-year mortality in PMF.
Clinical phenotypes that correspond to specific cytogenetic patterns were variable among the disease groups.
Most recently, the creation of a conditional Idh1R132H knock-in mouse model reinforced the effect of IDH mutations on increasing the population of haematopoietic stem or progenitor cells and DNA cytosine and histone lysine methylation.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous  hematologic malignancy characterized by the clonal expansion of myeloid blasts in the peripheral blood, bone marrow, and/or other tissues.
Loss of the long arm of chromosome 7 is a frequent event in MDS and AML.
These benefits came at the cost of more frequent anemia and thrombocytopenia in the early part of the treatment period.
Moreover, spliceosome-associated gene mutations were screened with whole exome sequencing results available through The Cancer Genome Atlas (National Cancer Institute).
The most common of these include mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 genes, which encode for isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2, respectively, and mutations in DNMT3A, which encode for DNA methyltransferase 3A.
Current diagnostic strategies are increasingly reliant on molecular markers, and their prognostic value continues to be investigated.
The percentage of BM blasts was 9.5+=1.1% in patients with mutations compared with 7.1+=0.7% in mutation-negative patients (P = 0.073).
Mutations in NPM1 have been described in 6% (6/97) of CMML patients and were associated with a poor prognosis.
No data are available using more than 60 mg/m2 of daunorubicin or 12 mg/m2 of idarubicin with high-dose cytarabine.
Decreased levels of GATA2 compromise the proliferation and survival of HSCs.
These two cases gave no signal and a wild-type result, respectively, by the Ipsogen assay, but were detected as abnormal by melting curve analysis and subsequent Sanger sequencing.
It has been shown that GATA2 inhibits erythroid differentiation through direct regulation of EPO activity.
TET1 target genes can either be activated or repressed, depending on the presence of PRC2 or existing chromatin marks.
The expression levels of GATA2 partially determine the fate along megakaryocyte-erythroid differentiation pathways.
High-dose cytarabine plus an anthracycline as induction therapy is considered a category 2B recommendation for patients younger than 60 years.
On the other hand, frameshift or nonsense mutations were distributed throughout the entire RUNX1 gene in both N-terminal and C-terminal parts.
Cohesin mutant MDS patients were more likely to be associated with high International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) scores (Table 1) and were more prevalent in patients who transformed to sAML.
This review will focus on the latest developments in the molecular biology, diagnosis, and treatment of classic BCR-ABL1-negative MPNs.
The only relevant observation was the higher frequency of CALR type 1 mutation in PMF compared with ET, which may suggest a particularly active role of the 52-bp deletion in causing bone marrow fibrosis.
For example, SF3B1 was shown to participate in Hox gene regulation through functional interaction with polycomb and trithorax genes.
FOG1S is preferentially excluded from the nucleus by unknown mechanisms.
More recently, somatic, heterozygous activating mutations of EZH2 that affect Y641 have been identified in germinal-centre diffuse large-B-cell lymphomas.
In contrast with our incomplete understanding of the biological implications of EZH2 mutations in myeloid malignancy pathogenesis, correlative studies have demonstrated that EZH2 mutations are a marker for adverse outcome in MDS and PMF.
Given the role of cohesin in alignment of sister chromatids during cellular replication, cohesin mutations could theoretically lead to chromosomal instability.
The most frequent exon 12 mutation involves an in-frame deletion of six nucleotides at codons 542 and 543 (N542_E543del); it is present in approximately 40% of V617F-negative PV.
Thus, for routine clinical practice, there is no recommended schedule for follow-up JAK2 testing, whether  qualitative or quantitative.
CSF3R and SETBP1 mutations are not mutually exclusive in CNL/aCML.
Approximately one-third of SCN patients eventually acquire truncation mutations in CSF3R (analogous to the truncation mutations we have observed in de novo CNL and aCML), which are associated with transformation to myelodysplasia or AML.
It contains three critical domains: JH1, JH2, and four-pointone, ezrin, radixin, moesin (FERM) homolog domains.
Sequencing analysis of the aberrant fragments of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene revealed the existence of eight types of RT-PCR products with losses of various exons of the published PTEN/MMAC1 sequence from exons 1-9 (Fig. 2).
High numbers of informative patients (those with mutations) are needed to establish correlations with response to specific drugs.
BCORL1a (an alternatively spliced form of BCORL1) contains additional 74 amino acids (for a total of 1785) encoded by a further exon (exon 9). BCOR and BCORL1 localize in different subnuclear structures. Shown in the Bcor murine ortholog; MLLT3 is also known as AF9 and is a fusion partner of MLL in acute leukemias. Direct or indirect.
Analogous to previously applied strategies that identified TET2, CBL, EZH2, and other mutations, we have identified mutations affecting, in a recurrent fashion, genes of the spliceosome machinery, using a combination of targeted search approaches and unbiased mass sequencing.
2-HG, 2 hydroxyglutarate; 5-hmC, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine; 5-mC, 5-methylcytosine; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; ASXL1, additional sex combs-like 1; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia; CN-AML, cytogenetically normal AML; CR, complete response; DNMT3A, DNA methyltransferase 3A; EZH2, enhancer of zeste homologue 2; H3K4me3, trimethylation of lysine 4 of histone H3; HOX, homeobox; HSC, haematopoietic stem cell; IDH, isocitrate dehydrogenase; LSK, lineage- SCA1+ KIT+; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; MLL, mixed-lineage leukaemia; MPN, myeloproliferative neoplasm; OS, overall survival; PMF, primary myelofibrosis; PRC2, Polycomb repressive complex 2; PTD, partial tandem-duplication; TET2, tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2.
In support of this possibility, we found that both patients harbor heterozygous mutation of GATA2.
DISCUSSION.
However, the diverse mutations likely involve additional abnormalities in other metabolic pathways; for instance, mutant calreticulin might have peculiar effects on megakaryocyte biology.
Given the high-toxicity profile of INF-alpha and the questionable benefit of its nonleukemogenic properties, further research is needed to establish INF-alpha as a first-line therapy.
All other lesions were confirmed as somatic or germline by analysis of CD3-sorted cells.
Cohesin defects were found in 11% of lower-risk MDS patients and 4% of MDS/MPN overlap patients (supplemental Table 4).
We also analyzed whether the locations and patterns of mutations had any clinical or prognostic effect on patients with CMML harboring RUNX1 mutations.
In addition to clearly hypomorphic mutations, splice site mutations were also identified (eg, STAG2 5' of exon 4 and 8).
We first analyzed the entire cohort of patients (Table 1) and determined the survival of patients in whom the 3 most common spliceosomal mutations were present.
OS according to JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status.
In both diseases, trisomy 8 and del (20q) are the most common nonspecific chromosomal abnormalities observed at diagnosis or at the time of progressive disease.
That these mutations were not overlapping and also not found in cases with other spliceosomal defects suggests that the effect of a spliceosomal mutation on myeloid malignancies might be inhibited by mutation in another factor or that they might not have a synergetic effect on leukemogenesis.
Notably, the features of BCOR mutations in AML closely resembled those of the germline BCOR disruptive mutations causing the oculo-facio-cardio-dental (OFCD) X-linked syndrome that is characterized by microphtalmia, congenital cataracts, dysmorphic appearance, radiculomegaly, and digital and cardiac defects.
Results from different methods may differ with respect to analytical sensitivity, specificity, and clinical relevance.
Recent studies suggest that the presence of U2AF1 mutation may be higher in MDS patients harboring a deletion of del(20q) (20%).
For patients with impaired cardiac function, other regimens that combine nonanthracycline agents (eg, fludarabine or topotecan) with cytarabine have been published.
As the main catalytic molecule of the PRCs, EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homologue 2) is responsible for mono-, di-, and trimethylation of H3K27.
DNA, RNA extraction and cDNA preparation.
Granulocyte isolation is not necessary because granulocytes comprise approximately 45% to 75% of total white blood cells in normal individuals, and this proportion is even higher in peripheral blood of MPN patients.
Whole RNA deep sequencing.
High-dose cytarabine should also be discontinued in patients with rapidly rising creatinine caused by tumor lysis.
She had a large monoallelic deletion of 61 kb (Chr3:128.17-128.23 Mb) completely encompassing GATA2 and 2 other genes, DNAJB8 and LOC90246 (supplemental Figure 1).
A routine blood test performed at 11 years of age revealed a mild chronic neutropenia, monocytopenia, and mild lymphopenia with a profound B-cell defect (Table 1 and supplemental Table 2).
Although CSF3R truncation mutations may exhibit sensitivity to JAK kinase inhibition in the context of high concentrations of the CSF3R ligand, downstream signaling operates predominantly through SRC kinases and exhibits drug sensitivity to SRC kinase inhibitors such as dasatinib.
The SETBP1 mutants disrupt this consensus b-TrCP motif, leading to increased SETBP1 and SET expression, which lowers PP2A activity and increases proliferation of cells.
These elements have been identified using quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses.
The correlation between cooperating mutations and AML transformation is also shown in Table 1. Only one patient harboring a C-terminal mutation (no. 30) had a cooperating mutation with NRAS (Gly12Asp).
However, what we have learned is that mutations in epigenetic modifiers do not fit neatly into the established framework of class I and class II mutations in leukaemogenesis.
Furthermore, Pase et al demonstrated that miR-451 regulates zebrafish erythroid maturation in vivo via downregulation of its target gata2.
We were unable to find any correlation between RAD21 and RUNX1 expression or between mutational status and expression in our patient cohorts, suggesting that this interaction in humans may be subject to pathway redundancy.
The current study identifies mutations and mutational combinations that have clinical and prognostic correlates in PMF and could eventually prove useful for advancing the understanding of disease mechanisms, as suggested by the association of a specific gene expression signature in the CD34+ cells of an exploratory cohort of subjects with their mutational asset.
Patient population.
EZH2 mutations were not detected in subject 103, but a homozygous missense mutation was present in subject 97 (Table 1).
It is found in only 3% of patients with de novo acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and is not seen in nonmyeloid malignancies or reactive myeloproliferation.
The analysis of overall survival was updated at the time of a planned data-collection cutoff 4 months after the primary analysis.
One study compared MDS and MPN with the corresponding secondary AMLs that had DNMT3A mutation and identified the same DNMT3A mutation in the antecedent disorder as in the secondary AML in all ten cases.
We identified mutations in 18 genes (Table 1).
The diagnostic value of JAK2 and MPL mutations in MPN is well established.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis and PCR-SSCP of the entire coding region showed that none of the AML cases had LOH or mutation. Only one frameshift mutation at codon 130 (insertion of CCCG) with premature termination of coding sequence was observed in the U937 cell line.
JAK2 mutations are known to activate canonical cytokine signalling pathways through the phosphorylation of STAT proteins.
Other hematological neoplasms (eg, myelodysplastic syndrome, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia) may harbor JAK2 and MPL mutations in low frequencies.
The guidelines recommend monitoring complete blood counts, including platelets, every 1 to 3 months for the first 2 years after patients have completed consolidation therapy, then every 3 to 6 months thereafter for a total of 5 years.
The mechanism of this action seems to be the activation of SCL after the binding of GATA2 to its promoter, and the embryonic retinoid-BMP-GATA2 signaling pathway, that controls progenitor cell survival in primitive hematopoiesis.
Multivariable analyses were conducted with the Cox proportional hazards regression model.
In contrast, GATA2 overexpression is associated with the more favorable subtypes of neuroblastoma.
The risks for neurotoxicity and renal insufficiency are increased with high-dose cytarabine; therefore, both renal and neurologic function should be closely monitored in patients receiving this treatment.
Genomic sequence analysis of subject 87 covering the coding region and splice sites of the remaining copy of CUL1 and EZH2 showed no aberrations in CUL1.
Recently, several groups reported frequent mutations of multiple components of the RNA splicing machinery in MDS and related disorders.
Although various JAK2 mutations have been reported in exons 12, 13, 14, and 15, in the vast majority of the cases mutations are found in codon 617, resulting in the replacement of the amino acid valine with phenylalanine [V617F, alias JAK2 NM_004972.3:c.1849G>T (p.Val617Phe)].
TET2 enzymatically converts 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5hydroxymethyl-cytosine (5hmC).
Because BCOR (and BCORL1) are ubiquitously expressed, it will be crucial to define the key targets of their corepressive transcriptional activity specifically in AML cells, in order to gain more precise insights into mechanistic role of BCOR and BCORL1 mutations in leukemogenesis.
Fourteen unrelated proband cases were selected for the presence of a neutropenia, a WHIM-like syndrome with possible evolution to MDS/AML, and their negativity for mutations of the major genes involved in congenital neutropenia (ELANE, CXCR4, SBDS, and G6PC3).
Figure 2. Cumulative incidence of thrombosis in PMF patients stratified according to their driver mutation. Vertical tick marks indicate right-censored patients. JAK2-mutant patients had a higher incidence of thrombosis than those with CALR mutation (P = .021). This difference remained statistically significant after adjusting for age (SHR, 2.19; 95% CI, 1.15-4.18; P = .017), the estimated risk of thrombosis being about 2-fold in JAK2-mutant compared with CALR-mutant patients.
Low-dose cytarabine resulted in a CR rate of 18% (vs. 1% with hydroxyurea) and a survival benefit compared with hydroxyurea in patients with favorable or normal karyotype.
The different genetic subtypes of PMF should also be considered in designing clinical trials on the use of novel drugs.
A reduction in spleen volume was maintained in patients who received ruxolitinib; 67.0% of the patients with a response had the response for 48 weeks or more.
For U2AF35, we amplified two areas with known mutations that included residues S34 and Q157.
There were no significant differences between the two groups with the exception of age (P<0.05). IPSS denotes International Prognostic Scoring System.
Cytogenetic/molecular features.
For this secondary end point, among patients who had a reduction of 35% or more in spleen volume, 67.0% (95% CI, 46.4 to 81.1) had a reduction in spleen volume that was maintained for 48 weeks or more (loss of response was defined as a reduction of <35% from baseline and an increase of >=25% from the nadir).
In addition, two recent reports found that the (R)-enantiomer of 2-HG ((R)-2HG) may actually serve as a cofactor for the activation of the EGLN family of prolyl hydroxylases (EGLN1-3).
Additional prespecified analyses showed that among the patients for whom baseline and week 24 data were available, the 129 patients receiving ruxolitinib had a mean improvement of 46.1% (median, 56.2%) in the total symptom score at week 24; the 103 patients receiving placebo had a mean worsening of 41.8% (median, 14.6%) in the score (P<0.001).
Moreover, Yoshida et al analyzed 29 cases with different subtypes of myelodysplasia and identified mutations of multiple components of the RNA splicing machinery, including SF3B1, U2AF35, SRSF2, ZRSR2, SF3A1 and PRPF40B, in 16 cases.
Twenty deaths occurred during the study or within 28 days after the last dose was administered (9 deaths in the ruxolitinib group and 11 deaths in the placebo group, including 1 death after crossover) (see the Supplementary Appendix for more detailed information).
Median time to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) transformation was 21 months (range, 3-94 months).
The first author and an author who was an employee of the sponsor wrote the initial draft of the manuscript, with assistance from a medical writer who was paid by the sponsor.
Consistent with the mouse data, TET2 mutations are seen in up to 50% of cases of CMML.
As illustrated in Figure 7, at least 3 genetic subgroups should now be taken into account in the interpretation of results: CALR-mutant, JAK2/MPL mutant, and triple-negative patients.
Risk of development of anemia, thrombocytopenia, marked leukocytosis, and large splenomegaly during the clinical course according to JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status.
Enrico Tiacci; Vera Grossmann; Maria Paola Martelli; Alexander Kohlmann; Torsten Haferlach; and Brunangelo Falini.
According to the response criteria of the International Working Group for Myelofibrosis Research and Treatment, 41.2% of patients in the ruxolitinib group and 46.9% of patients in the placebo group who were dependent on transfusions at baseline were classified as transfusion-independent during the study (Table S4 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Factors such as patient age, comorbid conditions, and features of the disease at diagnosis, including elevated leukocyte counts (>= 50,000/mcL) or number of cycles of induction to achieve remission, should play a role in choosing a consolidation strategy, as should issues regarding fertility and salvage options.
An additional three patients had identical nonsense mutations at the transactivating domain (Arg293).
Myelodysplastic syndromes are characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis and impaired differentiation, leading to peripheral-blood cytopenias, but the contribution of specific genotypes to particular cytopenias is unknown.
The mutation was retained during disease progression.
A well-thought-out plan for salvage therapy with either a matched sibling or unrelated donor HSCT should be an important part of the treatment decision for these patients.
PMF can be diagnosed by bone marrow biopsy that shows proliferation of hyperchromic megakaryocytes with large irregular nuclei, in association with either reticulin or collagen fibrosis, and in the absence of reactive fibrosis (Table 3).
For instance, U2AF1 mutations were associated with defective splicing of intron 5 of TET2 at both splice sites (Figure 3A; supplemental Figure 6), whereas splicing of other TET2 introns were less affected.
INTRODUCTION.
For the secondary end point of overall survival, at the time of data cutoff, 10 deaths were reported in the ruxolitinib group (6.5%) as compared with 14 deaths in the placebo group (9.1%) (hazard ratio, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.30 to 1.50; P = 0.33).
The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are characterized by clonal hematopoiesis, a variety of chromosomal abnormalities, bone marrow (BM) failure, and a propensity for evolution to acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Subsequent clinical trials have not included maintenance as postremission therapy.
For each mutation, we therefore compared the clinical characteristics of patients who had the mutation with those of patients who did not have the mutation.
An additional five specimens were positive in all laboratories where results were obtained; some of the laboratories did not obtain a result with these specimens, most likely because of low DNA concentration.
Mutations in TP53, EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, and ASXL1 are predictors of poor overall survival in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes, independently of established risk factors.
These have also been reported to be associated with intermediate-2/high-risk disease and increased risk of leukemic transformation.
The PCR product was run on a 2% agarose gel, then cut from the gel, purified and subcloned into the pCRII-TOPO vector (Invitrogen).
Finally, we used the Akaike information criterion as a measure of the relative quality of the clinical-molecular prognostic model compared with the IPSS.
The relationships between TET2 mutations and other somatic events have also been explored.
During ontogeny of HSC, GATA2 plays at least two functionally distinct roles: the production and expansion of HSC in aorta--gonad--mesonephros, and the proliferation and survival of HSC in adult bone marrow.
However, for patients at high risk for CNS disease, such as those with monocytic differentiation (M4 or M5 morphology) or high WBC count (> 100,000/mcL) at presentation, a diagnostic LP should be considered as part of the documentation of remission status.
Clonal acquisition of cohesin complex gene mutations.
PU.1 is essential for monocytic, granulocytic, and lymphoid lineages.
In addition, GATA1, -2, -3, and -4 can all activate expression of IL4, IL5 and other target genes of GATA3 in T-cells, as well as repress IFNy.
Furthermore, it is crucial for the proliferation and maintenance of HSC and HPC.
GATA1 is expressed in the Sertoli cells of the testis; GATA2 is expressed in endothelial cells and in the central nervous system, placenta, fetal liver, and fetal heart; and GATA3 is present in kidney, central nervous system, placenta, skin and mammary gland.
Sequences were analyzed with Sequencher (Genescode).
These pathways can be categorized according to their function.
MiRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional level, either by repressing translation or by inducing sequence-specific degradation of target mRNAs.
Genomic DNA was isolated and used to produce whole genome amplified DNA (by means of a kit [Qiagen]).
Principal causes of death in the ruxolitinib group were muscle weakness and general deterioration, subdural hematoma, renal failure, non-small-cell lung cancer, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), pneumonia (in 2 patients), and sepsis (in 2 patients).
Although all patients with AML are best managed within the context of an appropriate clinical trial, this poor-risk group of patients, in particular, should be entered into a clinical trial (incorporating either chemotherapy or low-intensity therapy), if available, because only 40% to 50% of these patients experience a CR with standard induction therapy.
Mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 that result in neomorphic enzymatic activity may represent novel, tractable targets for this genetically defined subset of leukaemia patients.
Patients with a higher level of FLT3-TKD mutations (> 25%) had a significantly higher 5-year OS rate compared with those with lower levels of mutations, which showed an OS rate similar to that of patients without FLT3-TKD mutations (71% vs. 37%; adjusted P = .004).
The expanded sample size of our cohort also enabled precise analysis of clinical associations.
In patients who have symptomatic anemia, thalidomide or lenalidomide should be considered, although therapy may be limited by toxicity.
Twenty-one patients had 23 mutations (72%) located in the N-terminal part and the remaining 9 patients had single mutations located in the C-terminal region.
Interestingly, these last two specimens were also found to be positive for JAK2 V617F by many of the participating laboratories.
The sequencing of the exome was performed by IntegraGen using a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina).
Subsequent sequencing of this gene in other samples revealed several point mutations that were confirmed to be somatic on examination of matched buccal-swab DNA.
Overall survival was evaluated for all patients by means of unadjusted and adjusted Cox proportional-hazards regression modeling; models were adjusted for the IPSS risk group assigned at the time of sample collection.
Cohesin complex mutations as a group had no prognostic impact in all and in cytogenetically normal AML patients.
We identified 6 mutations of GATA2 among these 14 cases, 5 point mutations and a large deletion of 61 kb completely overlapping the GATA2 locus.
The clinical utility of quantification of V617F has not yet been established.
The guidelines provide a list of several commonly used salvage regimens (see page 998).
ABSTRACT.
IDH1/2.
Recent studies of cohesin dynamics at super enhancer sites are in line with these conclusions: cohesin localizes to sites of high mediator occupancy at the enhancer-promoter interaction sites in lymphoma and myeloma.
This enabled us to determine clonal architecture, and we observed that cohesin mutant clones expanded or remained stable in all 13 patients with a statistically significant increase in clone size (P = .0032).
6. EXPRESSION AND BIOLOGICAL FUNCTION OF GATA2 IN HEMATOPOIESIS.
Cohesin mutations co-occur with other mutations known to be drivers of clonal evolution.
Gain-of-function of mutated C-CBL tumor suppressor plays an important role in development of myeloid malignancies.
A repeat bone marrow evaluation is performed in these patients and in those with hypoplasia after induction to document remission status.
An allele burden of greater than 50% suggests homozygosity, which is most likely to occur in PV; it is uncommon in ET.
Other genetic aberrations require identification. Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) is essential for normal hematopoiesis and differentiation.
The three risk groups had median survivals of 66 (low risk), 36 (intermediate risk) and 18 (high risk) months, respectively (P<0.0005).
Ruxolitinib, as compared with placebo, provided significant clinical benefits in patients with myelofibrosis by reducing spleen size, ameliorating debilitating myelofibrosis-related symptoms, and improving overall survival.
Using standard curves for both the wild-type and mutant forms, it is possible to perform this calculation; however, there is no standardization for measuring quantity.
In conclusion, our study revealed mutations in 66/81 (81.5%) CMML patients providing new insights into the molecular heterogeneity of this disease.
DNAnexus software allowed visualization of reads derived from spliced mRNA and those that completely match the genome, including both sense and antisense.
Initially, the intrathecal therapy should be given twice weekly until the cytology shows no blasts, and then weekly for 4 to 6 weeks.
Patients with RUNX1 mutations had a trend of increased risk of AML transformation compared with that in mutation-negative patients, but the difference did not reach statistical significance.
Such phenotypes would then be absent in myeloid cells lacking the corresponding transcripts.
We examined RUNX1 mutations in 81 patients with CMML at initial diagnosis.
Mutations in IDH1 were first identified in glioblastoma through whole-exome sequencing; this led to the identification of IDH1 mutations in 12% of 149 glioblastoma samples.
We then validated the results in an independent cohort of 268 patients from the H.
There were no significant differences in the clinicohematological features between RUNX1 mutationpositive and RUNX1 mutation-negative groups.
The disease course of CNL is variable, but acceleration is typically characterized by refractory neutrophilia, worsening organomegaly, and blastic transformation.
Besides, mutations in sequences encoding the N-terminal transactivation domain of GATA1 have been found in patients with Down syndrome who have a transient myeloproliferative disorder, a clonal disease that is characterized by immature megakaryoblasts in the fetal liver and peripheral blood, that can progress to acute megakaryocytic leukemia.
However, if symptoms persist, and bleeding and mass/lesions are excluded, the patient should have a lumbar puncture (LP) for diagnostic and possible therapeutic purposes once coagulopathy has been corrected and adequate platelet support is available.
Organelles that are found in virtually all eukaryotic cells. They are involved in the catabolism of very-long-chain fatty acids, branchedchain fatty acids, d-amino acids, polyamines and the biosynthesis of plasmalogens and etherphospholipids.
Study Oversight.
Thus, as the population ages, the incidence of AML, along with myelodysplasia, seems to be rising.
In this subgroup, we did not identify a difference in OS and RFS for patients with or without mutations in the cohesin complex (OS: HR 0.73; 95% CI, 0.34-1.57; P = .42) and (RFS: HR 0.47; 95% CI, 0.19-1.16; P = .1; supplemental Figure 3A-B).
To the best of our knowledge, this series is the largest one of CMML that has been examined for RUNX1 mutations and we showed a high frequency of RUNX1 mutations occurring preferentially at RHD with nonsense or frameshift patterns.
Both the NCCN and the European LeukemiaNet (ELN) classify patients with NK-AML and mutated NPM1 or CEBPA (without FLT3-ITD) as having favorable risk.
This study identified age >65 years, presence of constitutional symptoms, hemoglobin level <10 g/dL, leukocyte count >25 x 109/L, and circulating blast cells 1% or greater as independent predictors of shortened survival at diagnosis.
A higher frequency of cohesin defects was found in sAML and high-risk MDS patients, with somatic alterations in 20% and 17% of these disease phenotypes, respectively (Figure 1C).
Thus, increased D-2HG becomes a negative regulator of TET2 (an alphaKG-dependent enzyme), resulting in abnormalities in global DNA methylation.
These SNPs have not been reported in dbSNP (version 137) and were not identified in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 30 healthy controls.
Germline deletion of the Gata1 gene in mice leads to embryonic lethality caused by an arrest of erythroid development at the proerythroblast stage, providing direct evidence that Gata1 is essential for erythropoiesis.
These interactions can either involve only N-ZnF, as in the case of FOG1, or occur in collaboration with C-ZnF, for example, with Sp1, EKLF and GATA1 itself.
Mutations in CEBPA have been reported in 7% to 11% of patients with AML (or 13%-15% of those with NK-AML) and has been associated with a favorable outcome (similar to patients with CBF translocations) with regard to increased remission duration and OS outcomes compared with wild-type CEBPA.
(Ipsogen became Qiagen Marseille in 2013.)
Subjects carrying 7 or 7q deletions showed a significantly worse survival compared to individuals without any EZH2 abnormalities (P < 0.001; Supplementary Fig. 7).
In 10 of 13 cohesin mutant patients with serial samples, the cohesin mutant clone achieved clonal dominance at the time of transformation.
Immunoprecipitation of methylated DNA followed by hybridization to DNA microarray chips (MeDIP-chip) revealed that AMLs with DNMT3AR882 mutations had decreased methylation at 182 specific genomic loci compared with DNMT3A-wild-type AML.
In all, 10 of 13 patients had cohesin present in the dominant clone after transformation (supplemental Tables 10-11).
Taken together, it is likely that NOTCH1 and/or BMP4-signaling pathways initiate GATA2 and FLI1 expression, which then autoregulate each other and combine to initiate SCL transcription (Fig. 3).
APL uniquely responds to differentiation-inducing therapy with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and/or arsenic trioxide.
This is most prominent for the association of SF3B1 mutations with increased ring sideroblasts.
For detection of U2AF35 mutations, we applied the standard PCR techniques and bidirectional sequencing.
This discovery represents a significant advance in the field of MDS research, providing a novel clue to understanding of the pathogenesis of MDS.
The PRC2 complex consists of four core members: EZH1 or EZH2, embryonic ectoderm development (EED), suppressor of zeste 12 homologue (SUZ12) and RBAP48 (also known as RBBP4) (reviewed recently 61).
In the ELN guidelines, patients with NK-AML with both mutated NPM1 and FLT3, and those with wild-type NPM1 and mutated FLT3 or wild-type NPM1 and FLT3 are categorized as having intermediate-risk AML ("Intermediate I" group).
In contrast, U2AF1 mutations were most frequent in the high-risk MDS/AML cohort (11%), whereas SRSF2 was most frequently mutated in MDS/MPN (24%) particularly in CMML (28%; Figure 2A).
Mutations of TET2 were overrepresented in samples with normal cytogenetic features (P = 0.005) (Table 7 in the Supplementary Appendix), whereas TP53 mutations were strongly associated with a complex karyotype (P<0.001).
Induction Therapy: Standard induction regimens are appropriate for patients younger than age 60 years.
There appears to be a low incidence rate of N-RAS (~4-9%) in MDS patients.
In sum, our studies found the widespread presence of mutations in genes involved in splicing in myeloid neoplasms.
In the European cohort, JAK2V617F mutation was associated with older age (P = 0.005), higher hemoglobin level (P = 0.0001) and increased leukocyte count (P = 0.001); EZH2 mutations with leukocytosis (P = 0.01) and >=1% circulating blasts (P = 0.02); ASXL1 mutations with leukocytosis (P<0.001), >=1% circulating blasts (P = 0.001), anemia (P = 0.01), splenomegaly (P = 0.007) and constitutional symptoms (P<0.01); SRSF2 mutations with older age (P<0.001), leukocytosis (P<0.01), >=1% circulating blasts (P = 0.012) and constitutional symptoms (P = 0.009).
The discovery of high-frequency CSF3R mutations in CNL, and to a lesser extent in aCML, identifies a new major diagnostic criterion for these diseases and suggests a close relationship between these neutrophilic leukemias.
The role of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.
There are several studies on the characteristics and function of the GATA1 protein domains; however, little is known about GATA2.
This mutation is present in approximately 96% of PV cases, 55% of ET cases, and 65% of PMF cases.
The integration of mutation assessment in diagnostic classification and prognostic scoring systems has the potential to parse diverse myelodysplastic syndromes into a set of discrete diseases with predictable clinical phenotypes, prognosis, and responses to therapy.
Different types of CALR exon 9 mutations and their frequency.
These data reveal a novel mechanism for the regulation of GATA1 interaction with FOG1-dependent protein complexes through the production of two translational isoforms with differential interaction profiles and independent nuclear localization control.
Recently, two studies have shown that GATA1 regulates erythropoiesis by controlling miRNAs.
Functional studies showed that the L359V mutant resulted in enhanced GATA2 transactivation activity, and that both GATA2 mutations repressed PU.1 activity via aberrant protein-protein interaction.
Some published methods screen for mutations using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography or high-resolution melting-curve analysis, followed by direct sequencing to confirm that a mutation is present.
This mutation has also been observed in conjunction with NPM1 mutations and FLT3 mutations.
Somatic mutations of the histone methyltransferase gene EZH2 in myelodysplastic syndromes.
Tissue typing should be broadened to include unrelated donor searches in patients younger than 60 years with karyotypes or molecular abnormalities deemed highrisk.
INF-alpha.
Figure 1. Schematic representation of JAK2 gene and mutation hot spots. Locations of reported mutations are indicated by colored triangles: red triangles for V617F, black triangles for other SNP mutations, and blue triangles for insertions/deletions. Representative codon numbers are marked above exon boxes. FERM, four-point-one, ezrin, radixin, moesin domain; JH1, kinase domain; JH2, pseudokinase domain; SH2-like, SH2-like domain.
To define a set of somatically mutated genes in bone marrow aspirates 5 from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes, we first examined 191 samples for abnormalities in known oncogenes (Fig. 2 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Differences in the distribution of continuous variables between categories were analyzed by either Mann-Whitney (for comparison of two groups) or Kruskal-Wallis (comparison of three or more groups) test.
RESULTS.
The low frequencies of RUNX1 mutations in the earlier studies were probably attributed to different patient populations along with the limited exons analyzed as well as the small number of CMML patients examined.
In more detail, we observed 10 novel different EZH2 mutations in nine patients: 6 missense, 3 frameshifts (2 deletions, 1 insertion) and 1 splice mutation (Supplementary Table 4).
Recent observations indicate that the JAK-STAT (Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway is activated in all MPNs regardless of founding driver mutations.
RNA was reversely transcribed to cDNA with the superscript II RNase H2 reverse transcriptase kit (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
The CR rates were similar, with 55% for the high-dose arm compared with 58% for the standard-dose arm for patients younger than 50 years, and 45% for high-dose cytarabine versus 53% for standard-dose therapy for patients 50 to 65 years of age.
Studies have further shown that polycomb-based histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27triM) plays a critical role in epigenetic silencing in tumor cells.
Yet, due to the limited number of EZH2-mutated cases, we did not separate the cohort into these two categories in subsequent analyses.
The insertion resulted in the frameshift mutation of codon 130 with premature termination of the coding sequence.
Spliceosomal genes are probably tumor suppressors, and their mutations may constitute diagnostic biomarkers that could potentially serve as therapeutic targets.
These genes are located at disparate chromosomal locus but act together in control of cell division (centrosomes, hetrochromatin, DNA duplication, gene expression, and chromosome segregation) through regulating dissociation of sister chromatids in mitosis or meiosis (Fig. 3).
Table 2. Adverse Events Observed in 10% or More of Patients Who Received Ruxolitinib.
Our sequence library for deep sequencing was generated by TruSeqCustom Amplicon (Illumina).
GATA2 mutation screening.
Therefore, as a functionally relevant upstream regulator of GATA2, NOTCH1 is a potential initiator of the circuit.
Most clinical and disease characteristics of patients with mutations in the cohesin complex were similarly distributed, as in patients with wild-type cohesin genes (Table 1).
Expression array and RNA sequencing.
The estimated 2-year EFS and OS rates were 23.5% and 38%, respectively, and estimated 4-year EFS and OS rates were 18% and 26.5%, respectively; no differences were observed between treatment arms with regard to EFS, OS, and cumulative relapse rates.
Two laboratories reported results as one of six categories (>=78%, 50% to 78%, ..., <5%), and one laboratory reported results in three categories (homozygous, heterozygous, and low-level heterozygous).
By contrast, ASXL1 loss did not result in significant changes in H2AK119 ubiquitylation in myeloid haematopoietic cells.
Previous version of these guidelines have used cytogenetics as the major defining criteria for risk of relapse.
Recently, several groups have reported whole exome sequencing of MDS and other myelodysplasias, in which a common finding was frequent mutations of genes involved in RNA splicing in MDS and related myeloid neoplasms.
This stratification system did not predict leukemic transformation (LT).
Figure 2. Frequency and phenotypic association of spliceosomal mutations in myeloid malignancies. (A) In the entire cohort (n = 310), a total of 88 mutations in the spliceosome pathway components U2AF1, SF3B1, and SRSF2 were observed in every subtype of myeloid malignancies, except for MPN. In low-risk MDS, SF3B1 mutations were most frequent among the 3 genes. In particular, SF3B1 was mutated in 15 of 20 cases of RARS (60%). In the high-risk MDS and AML group, U2AF1 mutations were most frequent (15 of 139; 10.8%). In the MDS/MPN group, SRSF2 was most frequently mutated (13 of 46; 28.2%), whereas SF3B1 is mutated at a high frequency in RARS-T (10 of 11; 90.1%). (B) Effect of spliceosomal mutations on clinical outcomes. In the entire cohort, patients with U2AF1 mutations (MT) had worse OS, compared with WT, but SF3B1 mutations made OS significantly shorter. In low-risk MDS, mutation of SF3B1 was a good prognostic factor, but SRSF2 mutations are associated with worse prognosis. In MDS/MPN, patients with mutated U2AF1 had a shorter OS, but SF3B1 mutations were associated with significantly better prognosis. In addition, SRSF2 mutations did not affect outcomes.
TET2 mutations are primarily located in conserved functional domains and the N terminus that predict a loss-of-function.
Further work is crucial to validate this finding and to identify genetic targets of EZH2 loss-of-function.
Conclusions.
Two specimens were found positive for the W515L mutation in all four laboratories.
The BCOR protein acts as corepressor of BCL6, it can bind to other transcriptional factors and appears to play a key role in the regulation of early embryonic development, mesenchymal stem cell function and hematopiesis.
The algorithm, with or without knowledge of cytogenetic or molecular risk factors, predicts the probability of achieving a CR and the risk for an early death for elderly patients with untreated AML, who are medically fit and therefore considered eligible for intensive treatments.
In three individuals, we could show that mutations were biallelic.
In the original study on the identification of calreticulin mutations in patients with ET or PMF, a multivariate Cox regression analysis of overall survival (OS) showed that patients with a CALR mutation had a lower risk of death than those with JAK2 (V617F) or an MPL mutation.
A large randomized phase III ECOG study reported a significant increase in CR rate (71% vs. 57%; P < .001) and median OS (24 vs. 16 months; P = .003) using daunorubicin 90 mg/m2 x 3 days (n = 327) versus 45 mg/m2 x 3 days (n = 330) in patients with previously untreated AML younger than 60 years.
Total RNA was extracted from BM mononuclear cells with the use of the Nucleospin RNA II Kit (Macherey-Nagel) with DNAase treatment.
The Roche product was added with 0.5 mM dNTP, 0.75 ml (25 mM) MgCl2, 1.6 M Betaine and three primer pairs (1 mM/each primer), with the sequences of primers and their nucleotide position shown in Supplementary Table 1, which cover the coding sequences from exons 3 to 8 of RUNX1b cDNA (GenBank accession number D43968).
Point mutations have been also identified in diseases that overlap with familial AML/MDS, such as Emberger and MonoMAC syndromes.
Tests for these molecular markers are becoming more common in commercial reference laboratories and in referral centers.
Homozygous deletion of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene has also been reported in some tumor cell lines.
However, chromosome wide analyses revealed that the vast majority of conserved composite elements are not occupied by these factors.
In the European cohort ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations were significantly (P<0.05) enriched in the IPSS high-risk group with mutational frequencies of 42%, 25% and 12%, respectively (Figure 1b).
Bone marrow evaluation is recommended only if the hemogram becomes abnormal, rather than as routine surveillance at fixed intervals, unless this is being performed as part of a clinical research protocol.
Deletions involving chromosome 7q, which includes EZH2, have long been incorporated into clinical cytogenetic prognostic schemas for patients with MDS or AML.
Bone marrow fibrosis secondary to PV or ET can be differentiated from PMF by bone marrow histology.
Binding of thrombopoietin to MPL leads to activation of JAK2, which phosphorylates MPL and initiates a cascade of downstream signaling events that regulate cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation.
INTRODUCTION.
Although the exact incidence of therapy-related MDS/AML is unknown, and varies depending on the types of treatment modalities used for a given primary tumor, recent reports suggest that therapy-related MDS/AML may account for 5% to 20% of patients with MDS/AML.
RUNX1 mutations were detected in 30 of 81 CMML patients (37%) at initial diagnosis (Supplementary Figure 1).
U2AF1 and SRSF2 are frequently mutated in high-risk MDS and CMML whereby RUNX1 mutations are relevant, which explains our theory that spliceosomal mutations results in similar phenotype to the corresponding loss-of-function mutations.
The impact of genetic lesions on survival was independent of current prognostic scoring systems.
The in vitro expression of JAK2V617F results in the constitutive activation of the JAK-STAT pathway and resultant cytokine-independent growth.
HLA typing should be performed in all patients with newly diagnosed AML for whom allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) would be considered.
This includes the discovery of the direct histone modifying activity of janus kinase 2 (JAK2), as well as identification of interactions between the fusion oncoproteins that are characteristic of APL and PcG proteins.
In this review, we highlight the recent understanding of GATA2 in normal hematopoiesis and in leukemia.
Clinical suspicion of PMF may be raised in the context of nonspecific derangements in PB counts and evidence of extramedullary hematopoiesis (ie, palpable splenomegaly).
Another gene in which splicing was affected was RUNX1.
The observations in terms of overall survival were validated in an independent cohort of 396 Mayo Clinic patients studied at the time of their referral, whereas only SRSF2 and IDH1 mutations were associated with leukemic transformation in the Mayo cohort.
Moreover, GATA2 is expressed in adipocyte precursors and control the preadipocyte to adipocyte transition.
In contrast, mutations in U2AF1 affected exons 2 and 6, corresponding to the 2 zinc finger domains of this protein (Figure 1A; supplemental Figure 3).
Univariate analysis disclosed significant correlations between shortened survival and EZH2 (P = 0.0003), ASXL1 (P<0.0001) and SRSF2 (P<0.0001) mutations (Figure 2a).
SETBP1.
In this study, we analyzed the frequency, clinical, and prognostic implications of mutations in STAG1, STAG2, SMC1A, SMC3, and RAD21, all members of the cohesin complex, in a cohort of 389 uniformly treated AML patients by next generation sequencing.
ASXL1-mutated patients were found to have a higher WBC (P = 0.009), higher AMC (P = 0.008), higher prevalence of circulating IMC (P = 0.03) and were more likely to have concomitant mutations of the U2AF35 gene (P = 0.03).
However, the functional contributions of these non-finger regions have not been fully described.
The prognostic significance of point mutations in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes may be driven by the association of these mutations with risk factors, including karyotype, blast proportion, and cytopenias, which are captured by existing clinical risk scoring systems such as the IPSS.
Epigenetics refers to heritable DNA-sequence-independent processes that regulate gene expression.
GATA factors occupied loci encoding multiple components of the SCL/TAL1 complex, a master regulator of hematopoiesis and leukemogenic target.
SF3B1 mutations are associated with a favorable prognosis, whereas U2AF1 and SRSF2 mutations are predictive for shorter survival.
Of the 259 initial patients, 99 experienced a CR and were therefore eligible for HSCT evaluation; of these patients, only 14 ultimately underwent transplantation because of illness, lack of donor, refusal, or unspecified reasons.
Well-known examples of deregulated transcription factors are RUNX1/AML1 and C/EBPA in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), SCL in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), and GATA1 in Down syndrome-acute megakaryocytic leukemia.
The discovery of recurrent somatic mutations in various genes encoding spliceosomal proteins indicates that spliceosomal defects constitute an important and ubiquitous pathway in malignant transformation.
The corepressors BCOR and BCORL1: two novel players in acute myeloid leukemia.
STAG2 and SMC1A are X-linked, whereas the other 3 genes are autosomal.
RESULTS.
BER is initiated by DNA glycosylases, which recognize and remove specific inappropriate bases, forming an abasic site.
Based on the current practice pattern and the literature, this Special Article provides recommendations and guidelines for laboratory practice for detection of mutations in the JAK2 and MPL genes, including clinical manifestations for prompting the mutation analysis, current and recommended methodologies for testing the mutations, and standardization for reporting the test results.
The only potentially curative therapy is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, but treatment-related mortality remains high.
In mice, loss of Gata1 expression in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages leads to markedly increased Gata2 mRNA levels, reflecting the role of GATA1 as a critical repressor of the GATA2 locus.
JAK2 Sanger sequencing assays, such as those for exon 12 mutations, should report any detected mutations using standard Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) nucleotide and amino acid nomenclature (HGVS, http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen, last accessed February 19, 2013).
U2AF1/U2AF35.
Whole exome sequencing of 15 patients with myeloid neoplasms was performed, and somatic mutations in spliceosomal genes were identified.
A group of proteins that function in histone-modifiying complexes to activate gene expression by inducing trimethylation of lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me3) at specific sites in chromatin that are recognized by the complex.
Advances in our knowledge of the genetics of myeloid malignancies, coupled with an improved understanding of the role of specific epigenetic modifications in leukaemogenesis, will probably lead to the development of additional therapies that improve outcomes for patients with MPN, MDS and AML.
In fact, when comparing JAK2-mutant and CALR-mutant patients, the subdistribution hazard ratio (SHR) was 2.19 (95% CI, 1.15-4.18, P = .017), indicating that the risk of thrombosis was about twofold in the former.
Gene expression and epigenomic analyses have identified a subset of downstream targets of epigenetic modifiers, such as the HOX gene clusters, that are essential for malignant transformation by specific epigenetic mutations.
One laboratory had a higher rate of discordance than the others; it is possible that this laboratory was testing will be reliable when such testing becomes truly an outlier, although it is also possible that there were clerical errors in reporting the results to the study.
DNAnexus software (DNAnexus Inc; https://dnanexus.com) was used to visualize single nucleotide changes, insertions, and/or deletions at the gene, exon, and base pair levels.
However, what importance amsacrine may have served in the outcomes of the HOVON/SAKK study is currently not known.
The reclassification of MPN by the WHO reflects the increasingly heterogenic character of MPDs.
Of these, mutations involving ASXL1 and EZH2 have been associated with poor outcomes.
Several studies have confirmed that, unlike mutations in splicing and cytokine signaling, mutual exclusivity is not seen between TET2 and other epigenetic modifiers; TET2 mutations appear to co-occur within the landscape of genetic events and are also frequently found in samples with normal cytogenetic features (P = 0.005).
These truncated receptors may also lack the binding site for suppressor of cytokine signaling 3, which reduces trafficking of CSF3R to the lysosome.
The MPL gene maps to chromosome band 1p34 and encodes the thrombopoietin receptor, which binds to thrombopoietin, the primary cytokine that regulates megakaryocyte development and platelet production, as well as hematopoietic stem cell homeostasis.
Mutations in the cohesin complex in acute myeloid leukemia: clinical and prognostic implications.
SF3B1 is a core component of the U2 snRNP that recognizes the 3 splice site at intron-exon junctions.
Although FISH studies for common cytogenetic abnormalities may provide a rapid screening to identify either favorable or unfavorable risk groups, they do not provide a full picture of the genetic factors, which contribute to risk.
A product with exons 4-6 missing and an insertion of 51 bp was expressed in one specimen.
CR rates for patients who are 50 years or younger have consistently been in the 60% to 70% range in most large cooperative group trials of infusional cytarabine and anthracycline.
If a clinical trial is not an option, then low-intensity therapy or supportive care may be the appropriate choice.
Mechanistically, defective splicing of specific genes may have similar consequences to loss of function mutations through the retention of introns (supplemental Figure 9).
The participating laboratories tested the samples using a combination of quantitative and qualitative assays for JAK2 mutations, and several of the laboratories also performed MPL mutation assays.
In the subgroup of cytogenetically normal AML (CN-AML), additional mutation analyses were performed for CEBPA, MLL-PTD, WT1, and WT1 SNP rs16754, NRAS, and expression levels of BAALC, ERG, EVI1, MN1, MLL5, and WT1 were quantified as previously described using complementary DNA from the KG1A cell line (BAALC, ERG, MLL5), plasmids (MN1, WT1), or from a patient sample (EVI1) to construct a relative standard curve using ABL as a housekeeping gene (Ipsogen, Marseille, France).
In addition to RUNX1 and CEBPA, mutations in the telomerase RNA (TERC) or reverse transcriptase (TERT) subunits have also been identified.
Relative contribution of JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status to OS as predicted by IPSS or DIPSS.
Additional high-dose cytarabine at this time is unlikely to induce remission in these cases.
This study suggests that 2 cycles of intermediate-dose cytarabine (1 g/m2 every 12 hours x 6 days; total dose 12 g/m2 per cycle) for each consolidation cycle may be a feasible alternative to the current NCCN recommendations of 3 cycles of high-dose cytarabine (3 g/m2 for 6 doses; total dose of 18 g/m2 per cycle).
Survival outcomes between these groups were similar, with a 3-year OS rates of 63% and 61%, respectively.
In CMML, ~40% of patients have ASXL1 mutations, with the most frequent aberration being c.1934dupG;p.Gly646TrpfsX12.
Category 2B: Based upon lower-level evidence, there is NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate.
In five out of eight subjects with an EZH2 mutation, a TET2 was present (ref. 3 and Supplementary Table 1).
In a retrospective analysis comparing outcomes with RIC allogeneic HSCT and autologous HSCT in patients aged 50 years and older based on large registry data, allogeneic HSCT was associated with lower risk for relapse and superior DFS and OS relative to autologous HSCT.
Similarly, as published by our group before, spliceosome component mutations involving SF3B1, SRSF2 and U2AF35 are common in CMML, and do not have an impact on either the OS or the leukemia free survival.
On the opposite, triple-negative patients were more likely to develop anemia compared with either CALR-mutant (P <.001) or JAK2-mutant subjects (P = .013).
Somatic cohesin mutations have been reported in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
To distinguish the independent contributions of mutations to the clinical phenotype and overall survival, we examined a large set of samples obtained from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes for the presence of somatic mutations in a broad spectrum of cancer-associated genes.
In a literature review of 40 patients meeting WHO criteria for true CNL, the median survival was 23.5 months (range, 1-106 months).
Patients who do not receive postremission therapy will experience relapse, usually within 6 to 9 months.
Moreover, haploinsufficiency of GATA2 in adult mice results in abnormal HSC homeostasis.
Two patients in our series (P1, patient number 6227 and P6, patient number 7015) were treated with hematopoietic growth factors without benefits (lenograstim followed by sargramostim in one patient and filgrastim in the other).
Further investigation in clinical trial settings will be required to determine whether JAK kinase inhibition in the setting of CSF3R mutation will lead to greater decreases in mutation allele burden compared with the responses observed in the setting of JAK2V617F.
CNL may be the archetype of an MPN whose pathogenesis is predominantly characterized by mutations of CSF3R, whereas aCML may be more genetically heterogeneous.
Based on subgroup analyses, however, the survival benefit with high-dose daunorubicin was shown to be restricted to patients with favorable- and intermediate-risk cytogenetic profiles (median OS, 34 vs. 21 months; P = .004) and those younger than 50 years (median OS, 34 vs. 19 months; P = .004).
It may be difficult to accumulate JAK2 exon 12 or MPL mutant cases for validation, given the low frequency of these variants.
GATA1 and SCL/E2A mediate the anchoring of these proteins to the DNA, while LMO2 bridged them together.
We are not proposing it as clinical tool for several reasons, including the fact that to this purpose it should be validated in an independent patient cohort.
However, as a caveat, a recent study indicated that the OS benefit with CEBPA was observed for patients with double mutations of CEBPA but not for those with a single mutation of the gene; the 8-year OS rates reported in this study for patients with double-mutated CEBPA, single mutation of CEBPA, and wild-type gene were 54%, 31%, and 34%, respectively.
The target genes (in total, 1782 amplicons) were successfully analyzed in all cases.
All recommendations are category 2A unless otherwise noted.
In the ruxolitinib group, 41.9% of patients met the defined response threshold of a reduction of 35% or more in spleen volume, and nearly all the patients had some reduction in spleen volume.
Most mutations within the N-ZnF of GATA1 disrupt its interaction with FOG1 and are associated with several human hematological disorders, including dyserythropoietic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and beta-thalassemia.
Whole exome sequencing.
Tet methylcytosine dioxygease 2 (TET2) belongs to the TET oncogenic family and is mapped to 4q24.
High expression levels of GATA2 were observed in brown preadipocytes before differentiation, and rapidly diminished after the initiation of adipogenesis.
To assess the prognostic impact of the resulting score, we included the score as a continuous covariate in a Cox survival regression model.
Furthermore, patients receiving ruxolitinib had reductions in plasma levels of C-reactive protein and the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-6, and they had increases in levels of plasma leptin and erythropoietin (Fig. S7 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Unfavorable karyotype had an IPSS-independent detrimental effect on overall survival (HR: 6.46; 95% CI: 3.4-12.5; P<0.001) (Supplementary Figures S2A and B) and, in univariate analysis, on leukemia-free survival (HR: 3.45; 95% CI: 1.03-11.6; P = 0.033) (Supplementary Figure S2C); the latter retained borderline significant in multivariable analysis (HR: 3.3; 95% CI: 0.98-11.3; P = 0.053).
Thirty-one patients (6.4%) displayed >2 mutations (Supplementary Table S2 and Supplementary Figure S5).
No differences were observed with respect to sex, blood counts, percentage of blasts in blood, subtype of CMML, cytogenetic risk group or International Prognostic Scoring System between CMML patients with RUNX1 mutations and those without mutations.
Although the ATRA-insensitive PLZF-RARalpha oncoprotein also interacts with the PRC2 complex, PLZF-RARalpha also interacts with PRC1 via its direct association with BMI1 (REF. 98).
Patients with significant CNS signs or symptoms at presentation should be evaluated using appropriate imaging techniques, such as radiography, CT, or MRI for detection of intracranial bleeding, leptomeningeal disease, or mass lesions in either the brain or spinal cord.
Second, known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were removed (dbSNP, version 137).
The role of follow-up testing for JAK2 and MPL mutations after therapy is not clearly established.
In contrast, mutations of ZRSR2 on X chromosome were distributed along the entire coding region.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are chronic and often progressive myeloid neoplasms associated with remarkable heterogeneity in the histomorphology and clinical course.
The use of high-throughput next-generation sequencing for somatic mutational profiling has led to the identification of recurrent somatic mutations within the cohesin complex in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), glioblastoma multiforme, Ewing sarcoma, and colorectal and bladder carcinomas.
Therefore, we investigated ASXL1 exon 12 mutations in 79/81 cases (no DNA available in two cases).
Table 2. Hazard Ratios for Death in a Multivariable Model.
In marked contrast, our patients with GATA2 mutations presented with monocytopenia with a median of 0.05 G/L.
RUNX1.
Moreover, cohesin gene mutations were screened using whole-exome sequencing results available through TCGA (http://tcga-data.nci.nih. gov/tcga/tcgaHome2.jsp).
There was no difference in outcomes in a comparison between CMML patients with a monosomal karyotype and those with a complex karyotype without monosomies.
As with JAK2 exon 12 mutations, these mutations occur predominantly in JAK2V617F-negative clones.
CR/complete response with incomplete platelet recovery (CRp) was achieved in 46% of patients, with a 30day mortality rate of 10%.
Eight cases included with therapy-related myeloid malignancies.
2. THE GATA FAMILY OF TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS.
For these patients, the panel feels it is reasonable to offer low-intensity therapy or best supportive care.
In comparison, a 10-fold to 100-fold increase in assay sensitivity can be easily achieved by designing a sensitive PCR method.
Two patients had two mutations and one (no. 4) had two missense mutations in RHD; cloning analysis showed that 14 clones harbored 238 C>T (Arg80Cys) and another 8 clones harbored 251 C>A (Thr84Asn).
We analyzed RNA sequencing results in patients with mutations in U2AF1 (n = 3), SRSF2 (n = 2), SF3B1 (n = 2), and U2AF26 (n = 1), as well as in a healthy control and 1 patients with MDS with a WT configuration of these genes.
Using deep sequencing and cross-sectional and serial analyses, we found that cohesin mutations were not commonly present in the founder clone but rather promoted clonal expansion and transformation to more aggressive disease.
In the present study, we describe the initial identification by exome sequencing of a GATA2 R396Q mutation in a family with a history of chronic mild neutropenia evolving to AML and/or MDS.
Among SMC3 alterations, 8 out of 19 were nonsense (n = 1), frameshift (n = 1), or splice site (n = 6) mutations, whereas 11 out of 19 were missense mutations.
The presence of TP53 mutation has an independently negative impact on prognosis for all subtypes of MDS, with a hazard ratio for death from any cause of 2.48 (95% CI, 1.60-3.84).
A retrospective study of 68 patients with ET found that the risk of thrombotic events in patients who receive aspirin (500 mg/day) was 3.6 per 100 person-years compared with 32.3 per 100 person-years in patients under observation only.
An in vitro study also demonstrated that a transduction of C-CBL mutants into c-CBL(-/-) hematopoietic stem cells increased their senilities to stimulation of ligands (e.g., interleukin 3, FLT3LG (FLT3 ligand), thrombopoietin, and stem cell factor) and had a long-term repopulating capacity.
FOG1 has also been shown to interact with subunits of the nucleosome remodelling and histone deacetylase (NuRD) complex (Fig. 2).
In the Mayo cohort, ASXL1 mutations clustered with older age (P = 0.01), constitutional symptoms (P<0.0001), leukocytosis (P = 0.007) and >=1% circulating blasts (P = 0.02); SRSF2 mutations with older age (P = 0.002) and anemia/transfusion need (P<0.05); EZH2 mutations with >=1% circulating blasts (P = 0.003).
Single gene mutations are not currently used in prognostic scoring systems but are likely to be key drivers of clinical phenotypes and overall survival.
In addition, unlike AML and MDS, where a monosomal karyotype has been associated with worse outcomes compared with a complex karyotype, this difference was not seen in our CMML cohort.
Although the biological ramifications of activating EZH2 mutations in lymphomagenesis are not well understood, biochemical studies have shown that Y641 mutation increases dimethylation and trimethylation of H3K27 despite impaired H3K27 monomethylation.
Other treatment options are primarily palliative and include splenectomy, involved field radiotherapy, erythropoiesis stimulating agents, androgen preparations and thalidomide and its analogs to treat anemia, hydroxyurea and JAK inhibitors to treat splenomegaly or constitutional symptoms.
The physical interaction between GATA1 and PU.1 is mutually antagonistic.
ASSOCIATIONS OF MUTATIONS WITH CYTOGENETIC FEATURES AND CYTOPENIAS.
Additional prespecified analyses showed that among the patients for whom baseline and week 24 data were available, the 139 patients receiving ruxolitinib had a mean reduction in spleen volume of 31.6% (median, 33.0%) at week 24; the 106 patients receiving placebo had a mean increase of 8.1% (median, 8.5%).
Figure 1. Pedigree description. P1 to P7 describes the pedigrees. Circles represent females and squares males. Parents are connected by a single horizontal line, and vertical lines indicate their offspring. Offspring are connected by a horizontal line. Siblings are placed from left to right according to birth order and are labeled with Arabic numerals. Each generation is indicated by a Roman numeral. Circles and squares are black when neutropenias have been formally identified. If a patient is dead, a diagonal line is placed over the circle or square. Smaller circles with a diagonal line indicate miscarriage (P1, III, 4; P1, III, 6) or termination because of AML induction treatment (P1, III, 7). Patients tested are indicated by the result of the GATA2 screening and a number (patient number 7107 was not analyzed). The absence (wild-type, WT) or presence of a GATA2 mutation (protein variation or complete deletion indicated by Delta) is indicated below the symbol of the patient tested.
The structures of BCOR and BCORL1 are shown in Figure 1 and their main features are summarized in Table 1.
Unblinding of the study-drug assignments and crossover from placebo to ruxolitinib were permitted for protocol-defined worsening splenomegaly (see the Supplementary Appendix).
Genomic DNA PCR amplification was performed using another exon-specific primer pair with earlier published sequences for mutation confirmation.
This model identified four prognostic groups with median survivals of 54 (low), 25 (intermediate 1), 14 (intermediate 2) and 6 months (high), respectively.
The diversity of PMF subtypes was not fully appreciated as long as the only known mutant genes associated with this condition were JAK2 and MPL, as illustrated in Figure 7.
The presence of hot spots and the absence of nonsense or frameshift changes strongly suggested that they could be associated with some gain of function rather than represented simple loss of functions.
Translocation is the most common genetic aberration identified in ETV6, for which approximately 30 partner genes have been reported and molecularly characterized.
However, on a univariate analysis, they had no impact on either the OS or the leukemia free survival.
Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors that are crucial for regulating cell differentiation and maintaining cell identity in different cellular contexts.
In addition to its role as an intermediate in DNA demethylation, 5-hmC has recently been identified to have at least another specific gene regulatory function.
Cell fractionation.
Because of the question on whether c.1934dupG;p.Gly646TrpfsX12 is truly an ASXL1 gene mutation vs a somatic alteration, we reanalyzed the entire cohort, excluding the 47 patients with this mutation and found no difference in our results (Supplementary figure one).
Reads were assigned to their patient-specific barcode, and sequences were analyzed twice separately using the 2010 DNAnexus software and the following pipeline of bioinformatics software.
Additional cytogenic and molecular markers have since been characterized, and their role continues to evolve.
Cutoffs for low expression of STAG2 was considered the bottom 7.5% transcript levels, and high expressors were considered the top 25%.
Because long-term survival is high with PV and ET, survival prediction may only be valuable if aggressive therapy is to be considered.
Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), IDH2 or tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2) affect 5-hydroxymethylcytosine modification of DNA, which alters methylation and haematopoietic development.
All of the aberrant transcripts with intragenic deletion of exon 5 contained the PTPase core motif. Aberrant transcripts from our normal controls all had the same deletion locations as the AML patients, although aberrant transcripts occurred more frequently in the AML specimens and cell lines.
Outcomes from the earlier phase III SWOG/ECOG study in younger patients (age <= 55 years) also suggested similar outcomes in those with favorable cytogenetics undergoing HSCT; based on intent-to-treat analysis, the 5-year survival rate (from time of CR) was 71% for the autologous HSCT group (n = 26; 65% underwent HSCT) and 63% for the allogeneic HSCT group (n = 19; 84% underwent HSCT).
GATA2 mutations in exons 2-6 were searched for by PCR and Sanger sequencing (primer sequences are listed in supplemental Table 1).
She died from a refractory disease after several lines of chemotherapy.
Factors predicting the course of disease are poorly understood and rely on clinical parameters such as anemia, splenomegaly or leukocytosis.
This result is different from Sakai's study of lymphoid neoplasms, in which the abnormalities of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene may contribute to pathogenesis in a small percentage of malignant lymphoma.
Bone-marrow-aspirate mononuclear cells and buccal-swab samples from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes were obtained from Rush University Medical Center, the University of Massachusetts Medical Center, and the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center.
In these regions, GATA2 can be ubiquitinated at least when exogenously expressed in cells.
Together with our data, this suggests that EZH2 may act as a tumor suppressor.
It is noteworthy that GATA1 controls hematopoietic development by activating and repressing gene transcription.
Although these recent studies have increased our understanding of the genetic drivers of CNL and aCML, this knowledge is lacking in ~30% of patients.
Investigation Drug Therapy.
DNMT3A is a member of the mammalian family of methyltransferases that enzymatically add a methyl group to cytosine in CpG dinucleotides in DNA.
R882 is the most commonly mutated residue.
Through the whole exome sequencing of nine cases with low risk MDS, of which eight were MDS with ring sideroblasts, Papaemmanuil et al identified SF3B1 mutations in six cases and in a subsequent large-scale mutation analysis, confirmed the high frequency of SF3B1 mutations in MDS (72/354; 20 %), which were rare in other myeloid neoplasms, including AML (3/57; 5 %), CML (0/53), and MPNs (12/420, 3 %).
The incidence of relapse was 47% and 35%, respectively, and the incidence of deaths in CRs was 5% and 20%, respectively.
In patients with monosomy 7, monosomal karyotype did not appear to influence outcomes (4-year OS, 0%-3%); the 4-year OS rates for patients with inv(3)/t(3;3) and t(6;9) and those without monosomal karyotype, were 0% and 9%, respectively.
Myelodysplastic syndromes are clinically heterogeneous disorders for which treatments are tailored to the predicted prognosis for each patient.
The Gata3 null embryos die due to internal bleeding, and display growth retardation, deformities in the brain and spinal cord, and gross aberrations in fetal liver hematopoiesis.
These include mutations in tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), IDH2, additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), which have recently been shown to have biological, clinical and potential therapeutic relevance in myeloid malignancies (TABLE 1).
Analysis of knock-in mice, where the FOG1/NuRD binding is disrupted, revealed the importance of this interaction for regulating erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis.
As shown in the heat map in Figure 5, the two mutational groups displayed a distinct molecular signature, that was characterized by 39 differentially expressed genes, 27 overexpressed and 12 downregulated (Supplementary Table 4).
Thus, there is a functional convergence of diverse spliceosomal mutations toward effects on specific genes, a phenomenon that explains the similar phenotypes of some of the different mutations.
Molecular abnormalities are detected in ~90% of patients with CMML.
Over the past decade a series of studies has implicated PRC1 activity in regulating HSC self-renewal and differentiation.
There is also reasonably good agreement among laboratories for quantitative testing.
Any clinician seeking to apply or consult the NCCN Guidelines is expected to use independent medical judgment in the context of individual clinical circumstances to determine any patient's care or treatment.
Fragments were purified and amplified by PCR for 6 cycles.
Based on the identification of IDH1 mutations, subsequent candidate-gene studies identified IDH2 mutations in AML.
In patients with both anemia and splenomegaly, erythropoietin stimulating agents are not recommended because increased extramedullary hematopoesis can lead to worsening splenomegaly.
Beginning in 1991, 81 patients with CMML were diagnosed and treated in the Division of Hematology-Oncology at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
There are no studies about miRNAs and GATA2 in human models, although databases present many potential miRNAs with predicted binding sites in the 3' UTR of GATA2.
ChIP experiments revealed that CBP is not only found at active genes, but also persists at several repressive GATA1 elements in vivo.
Acetylation also represents an important post-translational modification that is crucial for the activity of GATA family members.
The French ALFA 98 trial randomized patients aged 65 years and older who achieved remission (n = 164 randomized for postremission therapy), to consolidation with either 1 additional course of standard-dose cytarabine (200 mg/m2 x 7 days) plus the anthracycline to which they had been randomized for induction (idarubicin, 9 mg/m2 x 4 days or daunorubicin, 45 mg/m2 x 4 days) or 6 monthly courses of anthracycline (1 day only) at the above doses and 60 mg/m2 of cytarabine every 12 hours as a subcutaneous infusion at home for 5 days each month.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
Similarly, all mutations in SRSF2 affected position P95 (Figure 1D).
The current study was approved by the Mayo Clinic institutional review board.
Splenectomy is considered in refractory patients, patients who require frequent transfusions or who have significant portal hypertension.
Microsatellite markers D10S215, D10S541, D10S579, and AFM086 displayed 10/20, 9/20, 12/20, and 8/20 heterozygosities, respectively. But none of 20 AML cases displayed LOH in these markers, suggesting that the regions defined by these markers had both alleles intact in these cases.
When phosphorylated, this mutational hotspot is bound by the E3 ubiquitin ligase subunit b-TrCP1, leading to ubiquitination of SETBP1 and subsequent degradation.
Fragmented genomic DNA (0.5-2.5 mug) was tested for size distribution and concentration with the use of an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies).
The importance of cooperation with coexisting mutations and/or the effects of abnormal bone marrow environment represent possible explanations.
The accurate classification of AML requires multidisciplinary diagnostic studies (using immunohistochemistry, cytochemistry, or both, in addition to molecular genetics analysis) in accordance with the 2008 WHO classification.
The authors concluded that the prognostic relevance of DNMT3A mutations may depend on age and mutation type.
If no donor is immediately available, patients should be considered for a clinical trial.
JAK2.
In the central nervous system, GATA2 is essential and sufficient for spinal cord interneuron generation [175], for the induction of ventral gonadotrope and thyrotrope fates in the pituitary, and for the generation of serotonergic neurons in the rostral hindbrain.
Somatic cohesin mutations have been reported in several cohorts of patients with de novo AML.
The data presented above show that GATA2 is an indispensable transcription factor for hematopoiesis.
Clinically, epigenetic mutations occur in combination with both class I and class II genes and also occasionally with each other (FIG. 5).
S11 in the Supplementary Appendix).
The IPSS risk (low, intermediate 1, intermediate 2, or high) (Table 2 in the Supplementary Appendix) had been ascertained at the time of diagnosis.
There have been promising results from clinical trials that involve the JAK tyrosine kinase inhibitors TG101384 and INCB018424, but their role in future therapy is yet to be established.
We identified a heterozygous GATA2 R204X mutation (c.610C > T, supplemental Figure 1).
Currently, testing is based only on qualitative results, but the accuracy and sensitivity of quantitative assays may be assessed in future iterations.
Clinically, MDS patients harboring DNMT3A mutations demonstrate a more aggressive clinical course with shorter overall survival (OS) and increased rate of AML transformation.
Constitutional symptoms improved significantly in 40%-60%, and dose-dependent weight gain was reported in patients with low body mass index.
DISCUSSION.
These data suggest that TET2 can function as a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor in most patients; biallelic TET2 inactivation occurs in <10% of patients with leukaemia.
On the basis of the initial screen, we noted that mutations in U2AF1, SF3B1, and SRSF2 were the most frequent.
The BM smear did not identify myelokathexis features and the case was considered to be a WHIM-like syndrome.
The strong association with ASXL1 indicates that epigenetic dysregulation may be synergistic in the mechanism of action exerted by cohesin haploinsufficiency.
Moreover,a recent study demonstrated that high GATA2 expression in human HSCs and HPCs confers increased quiescence, an important hallmark property of HSCs.
We used a combination of genomic approaches, including next-generation sequencing and mass spectrometry--based genotyping, to identify mutations in samples of bone marrow aspirate from 439 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
It could be possible that a negative prognostic impact of cohesin mutations might have been missed because of the favorable prognostic impact of NPM1 mutations and the strong association between these mutations.
Further analyses were performed using oncomine (https://www.oncomine.org/).
In a multivariate analysis corrected for age, CALR-mutant patients maintained a better OS compared with either JAK2-mutant (P = .019) or triple-negative patients (P <.001).
BCOR mutations were demonstrated to be clonal, somatic, disruptive events involving the only functional allele, not only in male but also in female AML patients.
A total of 70% of the patients were men (median age at the time of bone marrow aspirate collection, 70 years); 66% of the patients were in the IPSS low-risk or intermediate-1-risk groups, 58% had normal cytogenetic features, and 13% had a complex karyotype.
The initial step in an accurate diagnosis must be the exclusion of the BCR-ABL1 translocation in patients who present with signs, symptoms, or laboratory values consistent with PV, ET, or PMF.
METHODS.
ASXL1 mutations were associated with a proliferative phenotype, higher WBC, higher AMC and presence of circulating IMC.
Somatic mutations, such as V617F mutation in JH2, disrupt the inhibitory function of the pseudokinase and thus lead to constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation activity that promotes cytokine hypersensitivity (UniProt, http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/O60674, last accessed November 28, 2012).
The presence of this mutation implied that no intact copy of EZH2 was left in the malignant bone marrow cells of this individual.
GATA2 is acetylated at various lysine-rich motifs that are highly conserved among different species (lysines 102 and 398 and amino acids 281-285, 334-336, 389-390 and 402-408).
We also performed serial analyses for 12 cases with STAG2 and SMC3 mutations and 1 case with a mutation of RAD21 (Figure 4C-D).
Some presentations by other groups at the 2011 meeting of the American Society of Hematology suggested a correlation between SF3B1 and DNMT3A mutations and a favorable survival effect of RUNX1 mutations in CMML with SRSF2.
Large numbers of genetic aberrations have been identified in patients with CMML.
A reasonable treatment regimen for these patients includes standard-dose cytarabine (100-200 mg/m2 by continuous infusion per day x 7 days) along with 3 days of anthracycline.
These agents can elicit improvement in blood counts but exhibit no proven disease-modifying benefit.
Clinical and laboratory characteristics of all 879 study patients, stratified into European (n = 483) and Mayo (n = 396) cohorts, are outlined in Table 1.
When choosing among these options, decisions are influenced by: 1) the expected relapse rate with high-dose cytarabine consolidation chemotherapy (which in turn is strongly influenced by cytogenetic and molecular abnormalities); 2) the additional morbidity and mortality associated with the transplant procedure, which in turn are strongly influenced by patient-specific comorbidity; and 3) salvage therapy options.
Some studies have reported the lack of prognostic value of IDH2 mutations, whereas others have reported favorable outcomes with IDH2 mutations.
We have investigated FLT3 and NRAS mutations in patients with CMML, and we also examined the incidence of mutations in the CEBPa myeloid transcription factor in patients with CMML who later had acute myeloid leukemia (AML) transformation.
Although GATA members have a restricted expression pattern, their functions are partially interchangeable.
Case series and analysis of registry data have reported encouraging results, with 40% to 60% 2-year OS rates and 20% nonrelapse mortality for patients who underwent transplant in remission.
Complications may occur in congenital neutropenia, essentially infectious diseases but also less frequently myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
The HOVON/SAKK study compared a double-induction concept using intermediate- or high-dose cytarabine as part of an induction/consolidation regimen in a phase III randomized study in patients (age 18-60 years) with newly diagnosed AML (N = 860).
Fig. 2. The results of sequencing of the isolated fragments from 7 abnormal transcripts of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene. (A) Deletion from nt 1064 to 1814 and 1835 to 1877 of cDNA. (B) Deletion from nt 1244 to 1526 of cDNA. (C) Deletion from nt 1296 to 2013 of cDNA. (D) Deletion from nt 1170 to 2041 of cDNA. (E) Deletion from nt 1180 to 2142 of cDNA. (F) Deletion from nt 1040 to 2091 of cDNA. (G) Deletion from nt 1035 to 2165. Arrow indicates deletions.
The panel has provided the following options for consolidation therapy for patients with better risk cytogenetics (those with CBF leukemia, without c-KIT mutations): 1) 3 to 4 cycles of high-dose cytarabine (category 1); or 2) 1 to 2 cycles of high-dose cytarabine followed by autologous HSCT (category 2B).
GATA2 interacts with FOG1 through the N-ZnF domain, with PU.1 through the C- ZnF domain, and needs both ZnF to interact with HDAC, c-MYB, RARalpha, PLZF, PPARy2, and PIASy (Fig. 1).
Preleukemic hematologic and immunologic parameters.
Again, no difference was found in CR rates (mutated 88% vs wild-type 78%; P = .39).
Tong et al reported that amino acids 381-385, covering the region adjacent to the C-terminal ZnF of GATA2, are required for protein interaction with C/EBPA, but not for DNA binding or nuclear localization.
Data were collected by the academic investigators and analyzed by the sponsor of the study, Incyte.
Cooperating mutations of FLT3 and RAS genes were also analyzed in CMML patients harboring RUNX1 mutations (Table 1); one patient had FLT3-TKD (Asp835Tyr), three patients had NRAS mutations and one had a KRAS mutation.
Patients who experienced a remission continued to receive therapy every 4 to 6 weeks to maintain remission for up to 6 additional treatment cycles.
As expected, in sAML and pAML, because of overall poor prognosis, the presence of spliceosomal mutations did not further affect survival (supplemental Figure 4).
The abnormal transcripts may result from aberrant RNA splicing, as evidenced by the occurrence of aberrant transcripts in the AML specimens, cell lines, and normal controls, and the simultaneous presence of normal full length transcripts in all tumor samples and cell lines examined.
Chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML).
Cytogenetics and Risk Stratification: Although cytogenetic information is often unknown when treatment is initiated in patients with de novo AML, karyotype represents the single most important prognostic factor for predicting remission rate, relapse risks, and overall survival (OS) outcomes.
Table 1. Summary of recurrent mutations in MDS.
The 4-year OS rate among intermediate-risk patients was 54% for the no-donor group and 53% for the donor group.
Patients with an ECOG performance status score of greater than 2 or those with significant comorbidities (regardless of performance status score) are more likely to experience toxicity and less likely to benefit from standard-induction chemotherapy.
Besides, despite a 5-fold increase in Gata2 mRNA, primary purified GATA1-deficient megakaryocytes manifest multiple abnormalities in growth control and differentiation.
In practice, however, clinicians find it easier to order both the BCR-ABL1 and the JAK2 assays at the same time in screening peripheral blood.
Nine of the 21 patients (43%) with N-terminal mutations had AML transformation compared with seven of nine patients with C-terminal mutations (P = 0.118).
Clinical associations and frequencies of spliceosomal mutations in myeloid malignancies.
Mutations in CSF3R have previously been identified in patients with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN).
Additionally, this study expands the current knowledge of cohesin mutations across the spectrum of myeloid diseases, identifying cohesin mutation frequencies in different disease subtypes, most prominently in sAML (20%).
Two missense point mutations in the middle of RHD (Arg80Cys and Arg139Gly) were described earlier.
The use of liposomal cytarabine, which has a longer half-life, for intrathecal use offers the benefit of less frequent (once weekly) administration.
Time to large splenomegaly could be estimated only in patients from the Pavia Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis.
A sequencing library was prepared for hotspot regions of IDH1 (exon 4), IDH2 (exon 4), NPM1 (exon 11) and the complete coding region of EZH2 (Supplementary Table 1), comprising a total of 22 amplicons with a median size of 336 bp.
More recently, cohesin has been found to localize at superenhancers, which are locus-control regions with broad peaks of H3K27 acetylation.
Figure 3. Effect of cohesin mutational status on OS in MDS. Kaplan-Meier curves for patients with MDS are shown for (A) STAG2 mutant patients and cohesin WT patients and (B) all cohesin mutant patients vs WT cohesin patients. Median OS of MDS patients with a STAG2 mutation was 35 months vs 50 months (P = .17; HR: 1.8 CI [1.1-3.1]), median survival for cohesin mutant MDS cases was inferior to WT MDS cases (34.2 vs 48.2; P = .21), and a significant survival difference was pronounced in patients with MDS who survived for at least 12 months (P = .01).
Importantly, most TET2 mutations are heterozygous in leukaemia, and the expression of the wild-type allele is retained.
In fact, hematopoiesis is an elaborate regulatory network of transcription factors that coordinates the expression of multiple classes of downstream genes, including cell cycle regulators and lineage-specific genes, ensuring that the population of mature cells is proportioned appropriately and maintained at constant levels.
Despite cohesin's role in alignment of sister chromatids during metaphase, these data provide further evidence that the leukemogenic consequences of cohesin defects do not involve disrupted mitosis and global chromosomal instability.
In addition to the TET family, there are other alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes that may be similarly inhibited by 2-HG.
There was no statistically significant difference, among the three mutation groups (SRSF2 vs SF3B1 vs U2AF35), in prognostically relevant parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
We screened all 9 coding exons for coding sequence changes that would result in a defect of the protein (small deletion, insertion, or point mutation) by PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing.
One patient had a baseline spleen length recorded as nonpalpable in error but had a prior measurement of 16 cm and a baseline spleen volume of 2450 cm3.
OS was calculated from the date of first referral to date of death (uncensored) or last contact (censored).
Sequence Analysis.
Within 140 CALR-mutant patients, 101 (72%) had the 52-bp deletion (L367fs*46, type 1 mutation), 22 (16%) had the 5-bp insertion (K385fs*47, type 2 mutation), and 17 (12%) carried other less frequent indels.
Margaret R. O'Donnell; Camille N. Abboud; Jessica Altman; Frederick R. Appelbaum; Daniel A. Arber; Eyal Attar; Uma Borate; Steven E. Coutre; Lloyd E. Damon; Salil Goorha; Jeffrey Lancet; Lori J. Maness; Guido Marcucci; Michael M. Millenson; Joseph O. Moore; Farhad Ravandi; Paul J. Shami; B. Douglas Smith; Richard M. Stone; Stephen A. Strickland; Martin S. Tallman; Eunice S. Wang; Maoko Naganuma; Kristina M. Gregory.
This mutation was found in the vast majority of patients with polycythemia vera (PV) and in approximately half of patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) or primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
6.1. ROLE OF GATA2 IN HEMATOPOIETIC STEM AND PROGENITOR CELLS.
Notably, deletion of core, non-enzymatic PRC2 components in vivo results in myeloid transformation and/or increased HSC self-renewal.
These nonsense mutations are likely be sensitive to nonsense-mediated decay and would be null alleles similar in effect to whole gene deletions.
All P values were considered statistically significant when <.05 (2-tailed).
However, due to the small number cases of our study and AML is a wide diversity disease which may differ in etiology, pathology, and behavior, the potential role of PTEN/MMAC1 in AML or in some subtypes of AML need further investigation.
Notably, somatic mutations in BAP1, a binding partner of ASXL1 and a probable antagonist of PRC1 activity, have been described in mesothelioma, melanoma and renal cell carcinoma but not to date in haematopoietic malignancies.
HR >1 or <1 indicate an increased or decreased risk, respectively, of an event for the first category listed.
Thirty-seven (42%), 13 (14%) and 2 (2%) patients had concomitant ASXL1 and SRSF2, U2AF35 and SF3B1 mutations, respectively.
Reticulin fibrosis is not significantly increased.
Detection of somatic spliceosomal mutations in myeloid malignancies.
However, only ASXL1 mutations (HR: 2.02; P<0.001) remained significant in the context of the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS).
Approximately 20-40% of patients with CMML have an abnormal karyotype.
Written informed consent was obtained according to the Declaration of Helsinki, and the studies were approved by the institutional review board of Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
The overall median survival was 25 months compared with survivals ranging from 14 to 30 months gleaned from 3 smaller studies.
Clinically, EZH2 mutations are also prognostically relevant in both low- and high-risk MDS and are associated with a worse OS compared with non-mutated EZH2.
The remaining mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing.
We also investigated expression signatures of genes associated with cohesin mutations or with reduced expression of STAG2/RAD21/SMC3.
Five were confirmed by classic Sanger sequencing: EPHB6 T483P, GATA2 R396Q, IMPG2 P1161L, NEK11 D87Y, and TTN P4737R (primer sequences are provided in supplemental Table 1, available on the Blood Web site; see the Supplemental Materials link at the top of the online article).
Moreover, patients with C-terminal mutations progressed to AML more rapidly.
Overall, nonhematologic adverse events occurred at a similar rate in the two groups.
Because JAK2 and MPL mutations are not completely specific for MPN, finding of these mutations in isolation does not warrant a diagnosis of MPN.
The mutation W515L represents guanosine-to-thymidine substitution in MPL at nucleotide 1544, which leads to exchange of leucine for tryptophan.
Taken together, these data suggest that cohesin function is integral to expression of key cell-identity genes and that reduction in gene dose of cohesin alters cellular identity.
Frequently, in these trials, marrow examination is not performed until completion of 1 to 2 cycles of therapy.
Patients with low cohesin gene expression showed similar expression signatures as those with somatic cohesin mutations.
Molecular profiling is increasing the ability to identify mutations at the molecular level, which carry prognostic impact.
Bone marrow (BM) samples were obtained with informed consent from all patients at initial presentation.
DNMT3A mutations were first reported in myeloid leukemias.
Using a cis-element knockout approach, it has been demonstrated that the Gata2 -1.8 kb site is selectively required to maintain Gata2 repression in late-stage erythroblasts in vivo.
9. OTHER IMPORTANT ROLES OF GATA2.
When considering all mutations in the cohesin complex as 1 group, OS and RFS were not influenced by the presence of cohesin mutations (OS: HR 0.98; 95% CI, 0.56-1.72; P = .94; Figure 2A) (RFS: HR 0.70; 95% CI, 0.36-1.38; P = .3, Figure 2B and Table 2).
Patients with PMF are considered low risk if they have no risk factors, intermediate-1 risk if they have 1 risk factor, intermediate-2 if they have 2 risk factors, and high risk if they have 3 or more risk factors.
To determine the expression levels of EVI1, relative quantification was calculated using the equation 2- Delta Delta Ct, as previously described.
ABSTRACT.
This comparison between the -2.8 kb and -1.8 kb sites illustrates how GATA motifs function uniquely and collectively to achieve complex and dynamic transcriptional control at the GATA2 locus during hematopoietic development.
Again, if the patient's clinical condition has deteriorated to a point at which active therapy would be detrimental, best supportive care may be the most appropriate option.
The analytic components include the analytic result (mutation detected or not detected) and a brief description of the methodology used.
The ASXL1 (additional sex combs like 1) gene, contains 12 exons and maps to chromosome 20q11, regulating epigenetic functions and transcription.
Researchers should be prepared to take on this difficult task, since in the future, novel low frequency mutations in other genes are likely to emerge from the sequencing of additional AML genomes.
DISCUSSION.
In the 2 cases studied (patient number 6165 and 6184), the vaccine antigen response was normal (supplemental Table 2).
In a multivariable Cox regression model, the presence of mutations in five genes retained independent prognostic significance: TP53 (hazard ratio for death from any cause, 2.48; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.60 to 3.84), EZH2 (hazard ratio, 2.13; 95% CI, 1.36 to 3.33), ETV6 (hazard ratio, 2.04; 95% CI, 1.08 to 3.86), RUNX1 (hazard ratio, 1.47; 95% CI, 1.01 to 2.15), and ASXL1 (hazard ratio, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.00 to 1.89).
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Other genetic aberrations (e.g., loss of heterozygosity or deletion) may also result in inactivation or decreased gene function.
TP53 mutations are ubiquitously mutated in human cancers and have been clearly identified to be oncogenic.
High-dose cytarabine therapy during induction was explored previously in 2 large cooperative group trials.
NCCN Categories of Evidence and Consensus Category 1: Based upon high-level evidence, there is uniform  NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate.
Three AML cases with cohesin mutations (SMC3, STAG2, and RAD21) at diagnosis achieved remission with cytarabine and idarubicin treatment.
According to the NCCN AML Panel, infusional cytarabine x 7 days combined with either idarubicin or escalated daunorubicin is a category 1 recommendation.
A total of 20 AML patients were analyzed for LOH using four microsatellite markers near or within the PTEN/MMAC1 gene locus.
The prevalence of EZH2 mutations in MDS is variable.
The functional consequence of these truncations is altered and increased receptor activity conferring ligand hypersensitivity.
We suggest, therefore, that EZH2 mutational status should be taken into account in future clinical studies of CMML.
All P values were calculated with the use of two-sided tests.
SRSF2 has also been implicated in genetic stability, and its defect could lead to hypermutability.
The factors included in the algorithm are the following: body temperature (<= 38--degrees--C, > 38--degrees--C), hemoglobin levels (<= 10.3, > 10.3 g/dL), platelet counts (<= 28K, > 28K-<= 53K, > 53K- <= 10K, > 10K counts/mcL), fibrinogen levels (<= 150, > 150 mg/dL), age at diagnosis (60-64, > 64-67, > 67-72, > 72 years), and type of leukemia (de novo, secondary).
None of the AML cases had mutations.
The UK MRC study (AML 10) also reported no DFS or OS advantage with allogeneic HSCT among patients (age < 55 years) with favorable-risk cytogenetics.
Somatic TET2 mutations were initially reported in myeloid neoplasms, including MDS in 2009.
The FLT3-TKD mutations predominantly occur independently of FLT3-ITD, and most frequently involve mutations in the D835 residue of a tyrosine kinase domain.
The main genes involved in congenital neutropenia were characterized during the last decade, with ELANE being involved in half of them (for review, see Donadieu et al).
Abbreviations: DIPSS-plus, dynamic international prognostic scoring system-plus; IPSS, international prognostic scoring system. Mutation analysis and survival calculations in the European cohort were performed from the time of diagnosis and in the Mayo cohort from the time of referral to the Mayo Clinic.
The major chromosome aberrations in leukemia are specific translocations juxtaposing genes that activate oncogenes or create novel fusion genes.
Notably, most of the mutated splicing factors in MDS belong to the A complex, occurring largely in a mutually exclusive manner, strongly indicating that the common functional target of these mutations should be the 30 splice site recognition (Table 1).
In addition to the 23 somatic mutations, we identified 3 SNPs (2 in STAG1 and 1 in RAD21), which have not been described by dbSNP and were not found in mononuclear cells of 30 healthy donors.
The prognostic effect of SF3B1 mutations has been investigated in several studies.
We studied the impact of driver mutations of JAK2, CALR, (calreticulin gene) or MPL on clinical course, leukemic transformation, and survival of patients with primary myelofibrosis (PMF).
For the latest update, visit NCCN.org.
It is the most common form of acute leukemia among adults and accounts for the largest number of annual deaths from leukemias in the United States.
In 2 of these 6 pedigrees (P3 and P4, Figure 1), we identified a GATA2 mutation in 4 affected relatives, 1 in P3 and 3 in P4.
Effect of spliceosomal mutations on clinical outcomes.
There is increasing interest in INF-alpha due to its nonleukemogenic potential; however, the risk of leukemic transformation with hydroxyurea and busulfan therapies has likely been overstated.
Initial studies of the role of DNMT3A in mouse haematopoiesis demonstrated no overt phenotype unless both Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b were lost.
Products were purified before sequencing.
Figure 5. Analysis of cohesin expression identifies a discrete subset of low expressors. (A) Expression of STAG2 in MDS and pAML subtypes. A discrete subset of patients exhibit low STAG2 expression defined as <2 standard deviations below the mean as compared with 17 healthy donors. This was more prevalent in patients with highrisk MDS and non-core binding factor AML without complex cytogenetics. (B) Percent of low expressors in cohesin genes. The frequency of cohesin low expressors for each cohesin complex gene (STAG2, RAD21, SMC1A, SMC3, STAG1, and PDS5B) is shown by disease subtype. STAG2 was most commonly underexpressed in high-risk MDS, whereas RAD21 was most commonly underexpressed in the remaining myeloid malignancies. SD, standard deviation.
However, with respect to the clinical data, a poor outcome was observed for patients that carried EZH2 mutations compared with EZH2 wild-type cases (alive at 3 years: 33.3 versus 69.9%; P = 0.001) as shown in Figure 1b.
Although the gain-of-function mutation in the gene encoding Janus kinase (JAK) 2 (JAK2V617F) is present in approximately 50% of patients with primary myelofibrosis, other mechanisms of direct or indirect activation of the intracellular JAK- signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway are known, suggesting that dysregulation of this pathway is a central pathogenic component in myelofibrosis, regardless of the mutational status of JAK2.
The reaction was first denatured for 5 min at 95--degrees--C and incubated at 37--degrees--C for 60 min.
This makes the accurate prediction of the prognosis an essential component of the care of patients.
BCORL1 somatic mutations were found in about 6% of a series of 173 AML patients which included cases with secondary leukemia (showing myelodysplasia-related changes or being therapy-related) and a high incidence (approx. 65%) of abnormal karyotypes.
In this regard, it is hoped that further extensive studies in GATA1 and GATA2-related leukemias could contribute to the development of new therapies for human leukemia.
In general, our data support the idea that activating mutations of oncogenes are relatively infrequent in myelodysplastic syndromes.
An understanding of the clinical effects of mutations in various genes could improve the prediction of prognosis for patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and inform the selection of specific therapies.
No advantage was observed with the addition of ATRA.
ChIP for EZH2 in the presence and absence of ASXL1 revealed that EZH2 recruitment was markedly reduced in the absence of ASXL1, suggesting that ASXL1 may be important for the recruitment and/or stability of the PRC2 complex in myeloid haematopoietic cells.
Haematopoietic-specific conditional alleles are needed to delineate the effects of somatic Asxl1 loss in the haematopoietic compartment; preliminary studies suggest that these mice develop myeloid neoplasms that are most similar to human MDS in vivo.
Megakaryocytes are typically normal, but can include some small hypolobated megakaryocytes.
Patients whose MDS harbors SF3B1 mutations often have a higher platelet count, increased ring sideroblasts, fewer cytopenias, and lower blast count, when compared with patients without SF3B1 mutations.
Similarly, patients 60 years or older who are physically fit and wish to pursue treatment after relapse may be offered the following options: 1) therapy on clinical trial (strongly preferred option by the panel); or 2) salvage chemotherapy followed by matched sibling or alternate donor HSCT (again, transplant should be considered only if the patient has entered remission or in the context of a clinical trial); or 3) retreatment with the initial successful induction for a patients with a long initial remission duration (ie, relapse > 12 months).
SF3B1 mutations were found in 68-82 % of refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RSRS) and 57-76 % of refractory cytopenia with ring sideroblasts (RCMD-RS).
The optimism for targeted JAK2 tyrosine kinase inhibitors has been tempered with increasing data to suggest that the oncogenic role of JAK2 mutations may be more complex than for BCR-ABL1 in CML.
While compromised 30 splice site recognition seems to be a common consequence of different splicing factor mutations, there exist strong genotype and phenotype associations for splicing factor mutations.
Biallelic mutations were frequently observed in AML-M0 and in myeloid malignancies with acquired trisomy 21 and trisomy 13, but were rarely found in other leukemia subtypes.
A subsequent study of 489 AML samples also found that DNMT3A mutations conferred poor prognosis and decreased overall survival.
All samples were barcode-tagged using 48.48 Access Array technology (Fluidigm, South San Francisco, CA, USA), starting with 50 ng genomic DNA per sample (PCR amplification protocol, Supplementary Table 2).
Interestingly, the latter genotype mimicked that of the AML index patient initially used for whole-exome sequencing.
In a large phase II study from the MD Anderson Cancer Center, 112 patients (age > 60 years; median age, 71 years), most of whom had additional risk factors, received clofarabine, 30 mg/m2 intravenously for 5 days.
JAK2 mutation has been identified in BCR-ABL-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm, myelodysplastic and myeloproliferative neoplasms (e.g., RARS-T), and a subset of MDS with 5q-.
Diagnoses of PMF and that of leukemic transformation (blast phase) were performed in accordance with the 2008 WHO criteria.
Adverse effects were reported in 96% of patients, and treatment was stopped in 10% of these due to toxicity.
Box 1. Mutations in epigenetic modifiers and transformation of chronic myeloid malignancies Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal disorders of haematopoiesis that are characterized by an accumulation of mature-appearing cells in the bloodstream and include the breakpoint cluster region (BCR)-ABL1-translocated disorder chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML), as well as the 'classic' BCR-ABL1-negative MPNs polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocytosis (ET) and primary myelofibrosis (PMF). Patients with CML or with BCR-ABL1-negative classic MPNs are at increased risk of leukaemic transformation, which is associated with dismal clinical prognosis. Prior work identifying the role of nucleoporin 98 (NUP98)-homeobox A9 (HOXA9) translocations as well as the overexpression of musashi homologue 2 (MSI2) following the leukaemic transformation of CML suggested a potential role for alterations in genetic regulators of HOXA cluster genes in leukaemic transformation of MPNs. Notably, mutations in TET2 (REFS 29,103-105) and isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) and IDH2 (REFS 106,107) occur in a significant subset of patients with MPN that undergoes leukaemic transformation to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) (see the table). Although there is evidence that TET2 may regulate the HOXA cluster, more work needs to be done to determine its functional relevance in disease transformation. The most common genetic alterations identified in AMLs that have developed from chronic myeloid malignancies include mutations in epigenetic modifying genes as well as genes without known direct chromatin-modifying functions such as TP53, KRAS, NRAS, CBL, Wilms tumour 1 (WT1) and runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1). Further comprehensive genomic and epigenomic characterization of paired chronic- and leukaemic-phase patient samples will be needed to further elucidate the mechanisms of transformation from MPN or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) to AML, and how these alterations compare to those observed in classical, de novo AML.
Mutational and methylation studies of a large cohort of patients with AML demonstrated that IDH mutations and TET2 mutations are mutually exclusive in AML, and patients with mutations in either TET2, or IDH1 or IDH2 share similar methylation profiles that are characterized by global promoter hypermethylation.
SF3B1 mutations are prevalent in low-risk MDS with ring sideroblasts, whereas U2AF1 and SRSF2 mutations are frequent in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and advanced forms of MDS.
In our analysis, the prognostic implications of mutations in the cohesin complex were not significant when considering all mutations in the complex together or individually.
The sponsor, in collaboration with the academic investigators, interpreted the data.
SETBP1 mutations in aCML were associated with higher white blood cell counts at diagnosis and poorer survival.
Therefore, G-CSFs or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factors should be discontinued for a minimum of 7 days before bone marrow samples are assessed when documenting remission status.
Clinical trials: NCCN believes that the best management for any cancer patient is in a clinical trial.
The impact on disease progression is unclear.
Our group has also analyzed a series of 225 samples from patients with AML and found no GATA2 mutations in any sample, confirming this result.
Heterozygous point mutations located in the second zinc finger of GATA2 have been identified initially in 4 families with MDS and AML.
Figure 1. Cumulative incidence of anemia, thrombocytopenia, and marked leukocytosis in PMF patients stratified according to their driver mutation. The thresholds for hemoglobin level and WBC count are those of the IPSS, whereas that for PLT count is the lower limit of normal range. Cumulative incidences were estimated with a competing risk approach, considering death for any cause as a competing event. Vertical tick marks indicate right-censored patients. (A) Cumulative incidence of anemia (hemoglobin <10 g/dL). CALR-mutant patients had a lower incidence of anemia compared with the remaining patients (maximum P value equal to .004). (B) Cumulative incidence of thrombocytopenia (PLT count <100 x 109/L). The cumulative incidence of thrombocytopenia was significantly lower in CALR-mutant patients compared with the remaining ones (P = .001 in all comparisons). (C) Cumulative incidence of marked leukocytosis (WBC count >25 x 109/L). The cumulative incidence of marked leukocytosis was significantly lower in CALR-mutant patients compared with JAK2-mutant (P = .004) or triple-negative patients (P = .001).
A single NPM1 mutation, which localizes to the cytoplasm, confers a higher complete response (CR) rate and improved event-free survival (EFS) and OS compared with patients with NK-AML with wild-type NPM1, resulting in outcomes similar to patients with favorable cytogenetics (eg, CBF AML).
Thus, GATA2 is crucial for the proliferation and expansion of HSC and progenitor cells.
Molecular Markers and Risk Stratification: The intermediate-risk cytogenetic category is the most heterogeneous group in AML, because it encompasses both normal karyotype without gross structural abnormalities and those with structural changes that are considered neither poor-risk or favorable.
In addition, there was no difference between CR rates of mutated and wild-type patients (mutated 83% vs wild-type 76%; P = .45).
Analyses were conducted in accordance with the intention-to-treat principle.
Low-risk MDS was defined as patients having < 5% myeloblasts.
He developed, at the age of 18, AML with myelodysplastic features associated with a der(1;7)(q10;p10) leading to a monosomy 7q and a trisomy 1q.
A global immunologic defect was identified with a very low number of CD14+ monocytes, CD19+ B-cell lymphocytes, and CD3-/CD56+ NK cells, along with a normal CD3+ T-cell lymphocyte count (supplemental Table 2).
The most common partner gene is EVI, as evidenced by the t(3;12)(q26;p13)/EVI-ETV6 (TEL) translocation, which was initially reported in 4 patients with MDS/AML and 1 patient with CML in blast phase.
Clinically, IDH mutations may be more commonly seen in older patients with higher platelet counts.
Notably, the SET domain, essential for the methyltransferase activity of EZH2 (refs. 8-10), was either altered or truncated in at least one allele in all affected subjects (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 8).
No significant differences were observed between the intermediate- and high-dose arms in rates of CR (80% vs. 82%), 5-year EFS (34% vs. 35%), or 5-year OS (40% vs. 42%), results that seem comparable to those from the CALGB study with high-dose cytarabine.
IDH1 mutation was found to occur concurrently with NK-AML and NPM1 mutations.
Mutational profiling for ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH identifies PMF patients who are at risk for premature death or leukemic transformation.
The presence of hypomorphic mutations suggests that somatic alterations of cohesin lead to loss of function.
All exons of selected genes were amplified and underwent direct genomic sequencing by standard techniques on the ABI 3730xl DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems) as previously described.
The reported DNA concentrations for the 66 specimens ranged from 0.3 to 318 ng/mL.
DIPSS was recently modified into DIPSS-plus by incorporating three additional DIPSS-independent risk factors: platelet count <100 x 109/l, red cell transfusion need and unfavorable karyotype; median survival for the low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2 and high-risk categories were 15.4, 6.5, 2.9 and 1.3 years.
The main objective was to evaluate the prognostic relevance of recently discovered mutations in PMF in the context of currently used prognostic models.
RFS endpoints measured from the date of documented CR were relapse (failure), death in CR (failure), and alive in CR at last follow-up (censored).
The most promising JAK2 inhibitors are TG101348 and INCB018424.
Similarly, the benefit in OS outcomes seen with CEBPA mutations seems to be lost in the presence of concurrent FLT3-ITD.
To further examine the impact of driver mutations on the clinical course of the disease, we subdivided PMF patients into 2 subgroups according to their IPSS risk: the "lower-risk" subgroup included patients with low or intermediate-1 IPSS risk, whereas the "higher-risk" subgroup included patients with intermediate-2 or high IPSS risk.
The same held true when all four mutations and DIPSS-plus were included in the multivariable model as covariates (HR: 1.4, 95% CI: 1.0-2.0; P = 0.046).
However, preliminary evidence suggests that further work along these lines will probably yield greater predictive value in the near future.
Blood and medullar tests revealed mild neutropenia; monocytopenia; B-, NK-, and dendritic-cell deficiencies; and an hypoplastic BM with a karyotype harboring the same chromosomal alteration observed in the BM of his brother, a der(1;7)(q10;p10) leading to a partial monosomy 7q.
Significance was determined at a 1-sided alpha level of 0.05.
SF3B1 mutations have been commonly identified in MDS (20%, 72 of 354 patients), with particularly high frequency in patients with ring sideroblasts (65%) and less commonly in other WHO subtypes.
The largest series of WHO-defined aCML consists of 55 cases from an Italian cohort.
The NCCN AML Panel suggests that complementary diagnostic techniques can be used at the discretion of the pathology departments of the individual institutions.
Nichols et al described a family with X-linked dyserythropoietic anemia and thrombocytopenia due to a substitution of methionine for valine at amino acid 205 of GATA1.
DISCUSSION.
MM Patnaik; E Padron; RR LaBorde; TL Lasho; CM Finke; CA Hanson; JM Hodnefield; RA Knudson; RP Ketterling; A Al-kali; A Pardanani; NA Ali; RS Komroji; A Tefferi.
The hemoglobin and platelet counts were at the lower range of normal values with a median of 12.5 g/dL (25th percentile: 11.2; 75th percentile 13.4) and 152 G/L (25th percentile: 125; 75th percentile: 180), respectively.
Somatic mutations may influence the clinical phenotype but are not included in current prognostic scoring systems.
Exon 12 mutations are far less common, present in only approximately 3% of PV cases.
A prospective phase II study evaluated the efficacy of reduced intensity conditioning followed by HCT in 103 patients with PMF or post-PV/ET MF.
We screened the whole cDNA of RUNX1b by direct sequencing for each of the three PCR products, which cover the entire coding sequences of RUNX1b.
Previously identified mutations, such as janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-V617F and fusion proteins involving translocation of the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene, also contribute to epigenetic modifications in myeloid malignancies.
Prognostic significance was sustained for all but IDH1 mutations in multivariable analysis that included all four mutations.
Overall, in this cohort of 81 CMML patients 32 variants (17 different) were detected in 13/81 cases (16.0%) for these four genes.
Single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) were filtered using COSMIC v53 and dbSNP135 databases for nonsynonymous variants with a reading call higher than 5, leading to the identification of 8 SNVs: EPHB6 T483P, ERN V458G, GATA2 R396Q, IMPG2 P1161L, KDM5C V858G, MAST4 K2422E, NEK11 D87Y, and TTN P4737R.
The mutation was also subsequently reported in MDS and CMML.
The most commonly mutated gene in this complex was STAG1 with 7 patients harboring a mutation in this gene.
As reference standards for quantitative JAK2 testing are made available, comparable results across laboratories can be achieved in monitoring treatment response and minimal residual disease.
Largely specific to myelodysplastic phenotypes, these splicing factor mutations provide a potential clue to better understanding of the pathogenesis of MDS.
Two of our CMML patients had biallelic heterozygous mutations, one carrying two missense mutations and the other carrying two frameshift mutations on separate alleles by cloning analysis.
Recently, a recurring monoallelic EZH2 point mutation in the SET domain (Tyr641; Tyr646 in NM_004456.3) leading to loss of function has been described in lymphomas.
Briefly, two separate PCR reactions were performed and the primers used were as follows: (for S34) Forward: 5'-GGTGCTTAATACCACGGAAAA-3', Reverse: 5'-AGTCGATCACCTG CCTCACT-3'; (for Q157) Forward: 5'-GCCTCGTGTGCATTCTCTG-3', Reverse: 5'-CTTTTCAGTTTCGCCGTGAG-3'.
In this study, ruxolitinib therapy was significantly more effective than placebo with respect to all primary and secondary efficacy end points, as well as in an updated analysis of overall survival.
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a Philadelphia-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) characterized by abnormal proliferation of megakaryocytes, deposition of fibrous connective tissues in the bone marrow, abnormal stem cell trafficking, and extramedullary hematopoiesis (myeloid metaplasia).
EZH2 is an H3K27 methyltransferase.
Patients should be monitored and assessed for nystagmus, dysmetria, slurred speech, and ataxia before each dose of high-dose cytarabine; patients exhibiting any neurologic signs should discontinue high-dose cytarabine, and all subsequent cytarabine therapy must be administered as standard dose.
A larger study leveraged next-generation sequencing technology and determined the overall rate of TP53 mutations to be 7.5-9.4%, with a much higher incidence in patients with isolated del(5q) (19%) as well as in those with complex cytogenetic abnormalities including monosomy 5 and/or del(5q) (72%).
C-terminal mutations have recently been described in a large series of MDS/AML in which no patient with CMML was included.
Additionally, 5-hmC may lead to passive demethylation as DNMT1 is unable to recognize 5-hmC; methylation marks thus become lost in succeeding DNA replication cycles, as newly incorporated cytosines in the daughter strand fail to become methylated.
They were aligned to hg19 using STAR.
The identification of somatic mutations of calreticulin has substantially modified our knowledge of PMF.
Gene set enrichment analysis of expression data from DNMT3A-mutant compared with DNMT3A-wild-type AML patient samples identified altered expression of genes in key metabolic and apoptosis pathways.
Multiple steps were performed to reduce the false-positive rate within reported results.
Enriched libraries were tested for enrichment by quantitative PCR and for size distribution and concentration by an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer.
In 2013, somatic mutations of CALR, the gene encoding calreticulin, have been found in 20% to 25% of patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET) or PMF.
Even BRG1 is present at GATA1 regulated genes prior to their activation by GATA1.
Toxic effects were generally managed with dose modification.
n = 116 (mutants), 776 (WT).
We analyzed the effect of allogeneic transplantation on OS of patients with cohesin mutations.
We observed decreased expression of DCK and increased expression of UCK in patients with cohesin mutations or with nonmutational suppression of cohesin expression, indicating common alterations of downstream pathways (supplemental Table 12).
In a recent German study that included 305 MDS patients with del(20q), 16.3% had the ASXL1 mutation, which was associated with a shorter 2-year survival rate.
Fisher's exact test, the X2 analysis, the unpaired t-test and Wilcoxon's rank-sum test were used whenever appropriate to make comparisons between groups.
Systematic recording of infectious episodes was obtained from the patients' written medical history.
In another study, SRSF2 mutations also co-occurred with RUNX1 and IDH1 mutations.
Approximately half the grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia events (11 of 20) occurred during the first 8 weeks of treatment (Fig. S10 in the Supplementary Appendix) and led to dose adjustments or brief treatment interruptions.
If an HLA-matched sibling or matched unrelated donor has been identified, an allogeneic HSCT may salvage 25% to 30% of patients with induction failure.
METHODS.
BCOR and BCORL1 (at Xp11.4) encode a protein that functions as the corepressor of BCL6.
JH1, the catalytic phosphokinase domain, is located at the carboxyl terminus and induces phosphorylation of target proteins.
Currently, mutations in DNMT3A, IDH1, IDH2 or TET2 seem to have clinical relevance to risk stratification and/or therapeutic relevance in patients with AML.
Adverse effects were mild and included nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, anemia, and asymptomatic increases in serum amylase, lipase, and transaminases.
UPN, unique patient number; FAB, French-American-British classification; WHO, World Health Organization classification; IPSS, International Prognostic Scoring System; N/A, not analyzed; chr., chromosome.
Follow-Up Testing.
Two patients with mutations in STAG2 had missense mutations, 2 patients had frameshift mutations, and 1 patient had a nonsense mutation in this gene (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 3).
Below we will summarize some of the major functions of GATA2 in this biological process.
Several studies have demonstrated an inferior overall survival in SRSF2-mutated myeloid neoplasms (P = 0.01).
Disease phenotypes associated  ET  PMF  with MPL mutations include older age, female gender, lower hemoglobin level, and higher platelet count.
CHROMATIN/HISTONE MODIFICATION.
In a European trial that compared idarubicin 12 mg/m2 x 3 or 4 days versus daunorubicin 80 mg/m x 3 days in patients between ages 50 and 70 years, CR rates were 83% and 70%, respectively (P = .024).
We used 2 independent pipelines for identifying somatic and germline alterations.
SETBP1 mutations have also been demonstrated to occur at the time of disease transformation, suggesting that these mutations could be a mechanism that results in myeloid leukemic transformation from MDS and CMML.
To investigate whether these mutations were somatically acquired, we analyzed DNA of non-neoplastic T cells from the same individuals.
Table 2. MPL Mutations in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
Conversely, the use of the distal first exon (IS exon) is restricted to hematopoietic and neural tissues.
The trial protocol, which describes in detail the inclusion and exclusion criteria and other information about the trial design, as well as the statistical analysis plan, is available at NEJM.org.
All statistical analyses considered clinical and laboratory parameters obtained at the time of referral to the Mayo Clinic, which in most instances coincided with time of BM biopsy at the Mayo Clinic and study sample collection.
No OS advantage was observed despite the increased response to HMAs.
The CALGB trial also included maintenance chemotherapy following the consolidation phase; however, not all patients in remission received maintenance (55% of patients in CR) following high-dose cytarabine consolidation.
Moreover, GATA2 directly upregulates BMP4 expression, binding to the regulatory elements present at the BMP4 promoter.
No treatment is indicated for low-risk patients.
All these findings point to mutational targeting of corepressors as a new mechanism of leukemogenesis.
In addition, the guidelines can serve as a reference guide for clinical practitioners and other health care professionals in interpretation and utilization of the results.
Because complete remission rates rarely exceed 70% in younger patients and 50% in older patients, substantial opportunity exists for innovative clinical trials involving both patient populations.
Mutations in the cohesin complex are novel, genetic lesions in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) that are not well characterized.
Rasburicase should be considered as initial treatment in patients with rapidly increasing blast counts, high uric acid, or evidence of impaired renal function.
Extrapolation from studies conducted in patients with PV may suggest commensurate efficacy of aspirin in patients with ET.
These findings also highlight the cost and the huge amount of time involved to investigate the functional and clinical aspects of genetic lesions that occur at a relatively low frequency in AML.
By contrast, the overexpression of wildtype EZH2 is commonly observed in various epithelial malignancies, and increased EZH2 expression has been shown to be caused, at least in part, by the loss of transcriptional repression by specific microRNAs including miR-101 (REF. 64).
Figure 1. Mutations in CSF3R and SETBP1 are common in CNL and aCML. Percentages of CSF3R, SETBP1, and JAK2 V617F mutations in 29 patients with CNL or aCML are shown. CSF3R mutations arise in 2 classes, nonsense or frameshift mutations that truncate the cytoplasmic tail (truncation mutations) and point mutations in the extracellular domain (membrane proximal mutation), and some cases exhibit both classes of mutations on the same allele (compound mutations). These mutations can occur in isolation or in combination with other mutant genes, with 21% of patients having both CSF3R and SETBP1 mutations. One patient exhibited mutations in both CSF3R (G683R) and JAK2 (V617F); however, the clonality of this double mutation could not be established due to limited material, presenting the possibility of polyclonal populations of tumor cells with distinct mutational profiles. The frequencies of each class of CSF3R mutation alone or in combination with SETBP1 or JAK2 are shown for a combined cohort of CNL and aCML (n = 29), the CNL cases only (n = 9), and the aCML cases only (n = 20).
Events that occurred more frequently in the ruxolitinib group were ecchymosis, dizziness, and headache (predominantly grade 1 or 2) (Table 2).
JAK2 (Janus kinase 2), located at 9p24, belongs to the Janus kinase family and is the sentinel kinase in many hematopoietic signaling cascades.
The mammalian PRC1 complex is thought to be composed of only two core members consisting of RING1A and RING1B together with one of the following: BMI1, MEL18 (also known as PCGF2) or NSPC1 (also known as PCGF1).
Patients.
[END OF ABSTRACT].
In patients with t(8;21), c-KIT mutations were also associated with a higher incidence of relapse at 5 years (70% vs. 36%: P = .017), but no differences were observed in 5-year OS (42% vs. 48%).
In our study, 76 (34%) had an abnormal karyotype, with prominent aberrations being 11 (5%) with -Y, 7 (3%) with abnormalities of chromosome 7 (monosomy 7-6 and del7q-1), 16 (7%) with +8, 8 (4%) with a monosomal karyotype and 2 (1%) with a complex karyotype.
Significant differences in survival between the mutationally high- and low-risk disease groups were again not apparent in DIPSSplus high-risk disease (P = 0.39) but were restricted to low plus intermediate-1 risk disease categories (P = 0.02; Figure 4b).
4. TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATION OF GATA2.
Participation in a clinical trial investigating novel agents may also be appropriate for patients with a performance status score of greater than 2 without significant comorbid conditions.
In a recent report of 122 patients treated with high-dose cytarabine and daunorubicin, the remission rates were strongly influenced by cytogenetics, with CR rates of 87%, 79%, and 62% for favorable-, intermediate-, and poor-risk groups, respectively.
Mutations in ASXL1 and EZH2 had associations with clinical phenotypes, including overall survival, that differed from those of TET2 mutations, suggesting that these genes drive distinct and additive aspects of cellular transformation to myelodysplastic syndromes.
Both disease-specific and individual patient factors are taken into consideration when deciding treatment.
Such decisions rely upon currently available prognostic scoring systems, recently developed by the International Working Group for myeloproliferative neoplasm Research and Treatment (IWG-MRT), including the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS), which is applicable at time of diagnosis, and the dynamic IPSS (DIPSS) that can be applied at any time during the disease course.
This allows for broad multigene coverage in a single assay, thereby interrogating all of the targets deemed relevant for a particular clinical entity.
At least 3 functional domains have been identified within the GATA1 protein: the N-terminal transactivation domain, N-ZnF, and C-ZnF.
Fujiwara et al used ChIP-sequencing to define GATA1 and GATA2 occupancy genome-wide in erythroid cells.
Studies regarding the importance of JAK2 mutation in clinical outcomes in MDS are limited.
A higher cross-sectional prevalence among advanced cases suggests that both U2AF1 and SRSF2 constitute high-risk defects.
Presenting hematologic and clinical features of PMF patients according to JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status  Of the 617 patients studied, 399 (64.7%) carried JAK2 (V617F), 140 (22.7%) a CALR exon 9 indel, 25 (4.0%) an MPL (W515) mutation, and 53 (8.6%) had nonmutated JAK2, MPL, and CALR (ie, triple-negative subjects).
Patients with PMF may carry JAK2 (V617F), a CALR exon 9 indel, an MPL exon 10 mutation, or none of these genetic lesions.
JAK2.
We postulate that changes in epigenetic modifications caused by defective EZH2 may result in tumor promotion by different mechanisms depending on the cellular context and the oncogenic pathways that are activated.
Nonetheless, overall IPSS risk was higher in cohesin-mutated patients, driven by high blast count, suggesting a stem cell defect in the mutant clone.
Multivariate analysis has demonstrated that age, complex karyotype, MLL-PTD, and RUNX1 mutations are independently associated with poorer prognosis in MDS, a finding confirmed in subsequent studies.
Functional genomic studies will permit a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular complexity of these diseases.
In multivariate analysis corrected for age, CALR-mutant patients had better overall survival than either JAK2-mutant or triple-negative patients.
The second study was a phase II clinical trial that reported complete hematologic remission in 94.6% of patients who received pegylated INF-alpha (90-135 mu/week) after 31.4 months of median follow-up and 21.4% of patients in complete molecular remission.
In this process, GATA1 and GATA2 show dynamic changes in their expression profiles and these patterns are reciprocal during erythroid differentiation (Fig. 2).
We conclude that EZH2 is targeted by various types of deletions and mutations in MDS, probably leading to loss of function of the gene.
Similarly to mutations of BCOR, most of the alterations affecting BCORL1 were nonsense mutations, out-of-frame insertions/deletions or splice site mutations that, although not resulting in clearly diminished mRNA levels of BCORL1, were predicted to encode truncated proteins lacking the last C-terminal LXXLL nuclear receptor recruitment motif.
Table 1 outlines the presenting clinical and laboratory features and subsequent events in the 226 study patients with CMML, stratified by PB and BM blasts.
In RAD21, we found 2 patients with missense mutations, 1 patient with a frameshift mutation, and 1 with a nonsense mutation (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 5).
Changes reported in our internal or publicly available (Database of Genomic Variants) copy number variation databases were considered nonsomatic and excluded.
We performed a multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression considering type of mutation (CALR, JAK2, MPL, or none of the previous mutations) and each single variable included in the IPSS score at diagnosis (age >65 years, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, WBC count >25 x 109/L, peripheral blood blasts >=1%, and presence of constitutional symptoms).
However, many of these mutations in MDS are observed to some extent in other myeloid neoplasms, including AML and other myelproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), indicating the presence of common mechanisms among different myeloid neoplasms.
An estimated 13780 people will be diagnosed with AML in 2012, and 10200 patients will die of the disease.
Principal causes of death in the placebo group were staphylococcal infection, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, intestinal perforation, multiorgan failure, pneumonia, sepsis (in 2 patients), and disease progression (in 4 patients).
These data suggest that in the favorablerisk subgroup of patients with AML, the potential advantage with allogeneic HSCT in preventing relapse may be offset by high rates of transplant-related deaths.
Although they present overlapping expression patterns, GATA2 is expressed in HSCs, early HPCs, as well as erythroid precursor cells, controlling early stages of hematopoiesis, whereas GATA1 is required for terminal maturation.
In the HOVON trial, which randomized patients aged 60 years and older to induction therapy with standard-dose cytarabine combined with either standard-dose daunorubicin (45 mg/m2 x 3 days; n = 411) or dose-escalated daunorubicin (90 mg/m2 x 3 days; n = 402), the CR rate was 54% and 64%, respectively (P = .002).
In 1999, the WHO developed a newer classification system, which incorporates information from cytogenetics and evidence of dysplasia to refine prognostic subgroups that may define treatment strategies.
Table 1. Splicing factor mutations in myeloid neoplasms.
The L359V mutation and the deletion of codons 341-346 have been exclusively identified in myeloid transformation of chronic myeloid leukemias and are acquired.
This study was approved by the institutional ethics committee (Comitato di Bioetica, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico [IRCCS] Policlinico, San Matteo, Pavia, Italy), and by the institutional review boards of the remaining centers.
Older adults with newly diagnosed AML with ECOG performance status score of 0 to 2, with or without adverse features (such as therapy-related AML/prior MDS or unfavorable cytogenic or molecular markers) may be managed with one of the following options: clinical trial, standard infusional cytarabine and anthracycline; low-intensity therapy (eg, subcutaneous cytarabine, azacitidine, or decitabine); or intermediate-intensity therapy with clofarabine (category 2B).
Two major classes of activating FLT3 mutations have been identified in patients with AML, which include the internal tandem duplications (ITD) and tyrosine kinase domain (TKD) point mutations.
In 2006, mutations in a second gene, myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene (MPL), were identified in both ET and PMF patients.
In summary, our results show that mutations in the cohesin complex are recurrent mutations in AML.
Frequencies and patterns of RUNX1 mutations in patients with CMML.
For U2AF1 and U2AF26 we found that accumulation of unspliced transcripts rather than abnormal alternative splicing is the main consequence of the mutations.
It is hoped and expected that prospective therapeutic trials will be launched in the coming months to years to exploit these various genetic pathways, in order to optimize the use of current drugs, but also to develop unique, patient-specific new treatments in a disease with a great unmet need for more effective therapy.
Most frequently, MDS and AML are sporadic and affect primarily elderly patients with a median age more than 65 years.
This then leads to subsequent activation of downstream tyrosine kinases and activation of transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5, which in turn leads to transformation of hematopoietic cells into cytokine-independent clones, resulting in megakaryocytic hyperplasia and marrow fibrosis.
Interestingly, spliceosome mutations, specific in SF3B1, were reported in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
A low-positive control should be included in each run, to demonstrate that the assay is performing at the level of the measured sensitivity.
Throughout, 2-sided tests were used with significance defined as a <.05.
Recently, a similar 'GATA switch' has been described in mast cells, showing that it might occur in different cellular systems.
Allele Burden.
Cooperativity between GATA1 and SCL occurs at regulatory regions containing juxtaposed GATA and E-box elements that assemble higher order protein networks.
Because many older patients have some evidence of antecedent myelodysplasia, full normalization of peripheral blood counts often does not occur even if therapy clears the marrow blasts.
Technical details about sample processing for SNP-As were previously described.
For patients who present with solitary extramedullary disease (often referred to as myeloid sarcoma, granulocytic sarcoma, or chloroma) without overt marrow disease, the initial treatment should still be based on systemic induction chemotherapy.
These likely include patient genetic background, characteristics of the distinct CSF3R mutation (eg, hematopoietic cell of origin, allele burden, activation of distinct signaling cascades), and the accompanying clonal architecture of these neoplasms (eg, mutations of SETBP1, JAK2 V617F, or other genes).
Numerous prognostic models have attempted to risk stratify patients with CMML.
There is longstanding, yet debatable evidence that a reduction in hematocrit (Hct) level to <45% reduces the risk of vaso-occlusive events.
BCORL1 mutations mostly occurred in patients with s-AML and/or with abnormal karyotype, and carried germline TP53, CEBPA and NPM1 genes.
In the latest versions of these guidelines, the panel has endeavored to incorporate emerging data on the influence of mutations in specific genes such as c-KIT, FLT3, CEBPA, and NPM1 on subsets of patients within a cytogenetic category (see "Risk Status Based on Cytogenetics and Molecular Abnormalities," on page 995).
Presence of mutational hot spot in SF3B1, SRSF2, and U2AF35.
Patient groups with nominal variables were compared by X2-test.
Mechanistic studies to understand their functional and pathophysiological role are currently underway, but our genetic data suggest that cohesin mutations do not contribute to hematopoietic transformation through altered chromosomal instability.
Table 1. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of 879 patients with PMF stratified into European (n=483) and Mayo Clinic (n=396) cohorts.
These markers include FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3), c-KIT, nucleophosmin (NPM1), and CEBPA gene mutations.
Several groups have generated mouse models of TET2 loss, and in each study to date TET2 loss resulted in disruption of haematopoietic differentiation with progressive expansion of the lineage- SCA1+ KIT+ (LSK) population, which includes HSCs and multipotent progenitor cells.
To date, mutation or alterations in expression of EZH1 have not been found in human malignancies.
The hotspot region of ASXL1 exon 12 (n = 6 amplicons) was investigated by conventional Sanger sequencing using primer sequences as published by Gelsi-Boyer et al
The 2 most frequent molecular lesions with prognostic impact in patients with AML are mutations of the FLT3 gene (37%-46% of patients) encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in hematopoiesis, and mutations of the NPM1 gene (28%-35%) encoding a shuttling protein within the nucleolus.
Coagulopathy is fairly common at presentation in many leukemias; it is therefore standard clinical practice to screen for coagulopathy by evaluating prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen as part of the initial workup and before performing any invasive procedure.
In vitro analyses of several of these EZH2 mutants suggest that these mutations confer loss-of-function.
Abbreviations: AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia; ND, not done.
Multivariable analysis confirmed the independent prognostic value for survival of distinguishing mutationally low from high-risk groups in the context of IPSS (P<0.0001), cytogenetic risk stratification (P<0.0001) or both (P = 0.04).
Menghini et al presented evidence that GATA2 is phosphorylated and blocked by the PI3K/Akt signal transduction pathway, leading to an increase of adipose tissue differentiation and a reduction of adipose tissue-related inflammation.
The majority of the MPL mutations are found in exon 10 codon 515; W515L is the most common, followed by W515K.
None of the four mutations detected in the malignant cells were found in these T cells, confirming that these were acquired mutations (Table 1).
This suggests that cohesin mutations may occur at a similarly early time point of leukemogenesis.
When taking into account the type of CALR mutation, both patients with type 1 and those with type 2 mutation had a lower risk of thrombosis compared with patients carrying JAK2 (V617F) (P = .042 and P = .021, respectively).
However, changes in methylation were not correlated with robust changes in gene expression.
Although karyotype and molecular markers are powerful predictors of DFS outcomes, induction chemotherapy will be initiated before this information is available in most instances.
In addition, the Dusseldorf scoring system identified elevated lactate dehydrogenase and male gender as negative prognosticators for survival.
The clinical significance of the majority of genetic events has been validated based on a large cohort study that identified mutations as predictors for risk stratification in MDS patients and biomarkers for potential targeted therapies.
Minegishi et al reported an inhibitory function of GATA2 in the differentiation of hematopoietic precursor cells, and suggested that GATA2 may act to preserve the pool of immature cells.
Individual reads were 75 bp long.
RNA splicing is a necessary process such that pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) transcripts are processed so that introns are removed and exons are joined to form mature RNA.
The mutation L359V of GATA2 was found in about 10% of the patients at the progression phase of chronic myeloid leukemia, including accelerated phase and blast crisis.
RUNX1 and CEBPA were not mutated in any member of this family (data not shown).
The effect of the S34F and Q157P/R U2AF35 mutants was also tested in competitive repopulation assays, in which highly purified mouse hematopoietic stem cells (CD34- c-Kit+ ScaI+ Lin-) were transduced with each mutant and together with normal competitors, transplanted into lethally irradiated mice.
Karyotyping and cytogenic profiling is increasingly important in evaluating patients with BCR-ABL1-negative MPN.
The identification of GATA2 mutations in patients with mild chronic neutropenia subsequently evolving to MDS/AML suggests that it may be an early finding in disease initiation.
Figure 1. The World Health Organization (WHO) 2008 Classification of Myeloid Malignancies and Associated Genotypic Abnormalities: Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML); Myelopreliferative Neoplasm Associated Esosinophilia (MPN-eos); Myelodysplatic Syndrome (MDS). MDS/MPN Includes Subtypes Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML), Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia (JMML), Atypical Chronic Myeloid Leukemia-BCR-ABL1 Negative (aCML), MDS/MPN Unspecified (MDS/MPN-u), Which Includes the Refractory Anemia With Ring Sideblasts and Thrombocytosis (RARS-T). MPN Includes Nonclassic Subtypes Chronic Neutrophilic Leukemia (CNL), Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemia (CEL), Systemic Mastocytosis (SM), and MPN Unspecified (MPN-u). Classic Subtypes Include Chronic Myeloid Leukemia-BCR-ABL1 positive (CML), Polycythemia Vera (PV), Essential Thrombocythemia (ET), and Primary Myelofibrosis (PMF).
Consequently, one might predict that GATA2 and the SCL/TAL1 complex commonly co-occupy and function through such composite elements in vivo.
APL is a genetically distinct subtype of AML that is most commonly associated with a recurrent chromosomal translocation fusing the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene to retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RARA).
We examined the other members of the family (mother, father, the 2 other sons, maternal grandfather, maternal grandmother, and maternal cousins) for the presence of these variations.
If a diagnosis of PMF or ET is entertained, then MPL analysis should be performed in the setting of a negative JAK2 V617F assay, if required to meet World Health Organization diagnostic criteria.
Mutations in ASXL1, IDH1, IDH2, CBL, IKAROS, and LNK genes have all been described with variable frequencies in MPN.
The activated JAK2 causes phosphorylation of STATs, which then dimerize and translocate to the nucleus, where they regulate gene transcription.
DNA REPAIR/TUMOR SUPPRESSOR.
Several non-finger domains of GATA2 have been described: two transactivation domains (TAD), located in the N- and C-terminal regions; a nuclear localization signal (NLS); a negative regulatory domain (NRD); and regions that appear to be important for its degradation.
We included the information as to SF3B1 mutation status of 39 cases reported in our previous study.
However, several lines of evidence suggest that there are leukaemia disease alleles that cannot be classified into this widely accepted two-hit model of myeloid leukaemogenesis.
PCR products were electrophoresed on a 2% agarose gel, gel-purified with a MinElute Gel Extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and sequenced in both directions with BigDye Terminators v3.1 Cycle Sequencing kits on an automated ABI PRISM 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Table 1. Frequency of Mutation and Association with Median Survival.
No specimen was negative for all 12 laboratories, again presumably reflecting poorer reproducibility at the low end and possibly indicating high sensitivity (which could result in false-positive results).
These data underscore the importance of aberrant epigenetic programming in the biology of myeloid malignancies.
INTRODUCTION.
All patients studied during remission lost the mutation at this time point.
On the contrary, despite the fact that calreticulin mutations involve high platelet counts also in PMF, the risk of thrombosis of these patients is relatively low, at least compared with that of JAK2-mutant patients.
Both BCOR and BCORL1 genes are located on the X-chromosome and encode for large nuclear proteins that are ubiquitously expressed in human tissues.
Such an indirect alteration of key proteins known to be involved in malignant transformation could explain the leukemogenic effects of spliceosomal mutations, in particular how spliceosomal mutations may result in a phenocopy of features associated with known TSG mutations.
The amino terminus of DNMT3A contains both PWWP and ADD domains that recognize histone H3 lysine modifications and recruit the protein to specific gene targets (reviewed in REF. 19).
Moreover, mutations and in-frame translocations of MLL are now known to result in malignant transformation directly through alterations in post-translational histone modification (see REF. 91 for an excellent review on MLL).
Alan H. Shih; Omar Abdel-Wahab; Jay P. Patel; Ross L. Levine.
DNMT3A and its homologue DNMT3B are responsible for initiating de novo DNA methylation; by contrast, DNMT1 maintains methylation through cell division.
Two large cohort studies have indicated that TET2 mutations do not impact overall survival while another study showed that patients with mutant TET2 experienced a superior overall survival when compared with well-matched wild-type controls.
BCOR and BCORL1.
Outcomes from multiple cycles of high-dose cytarabine consolidation are comparable to results with autologous HSCT.
We also screened for homozygous deletion at PTEN/MMAC1 gene by PCR amplification of all exons, but no homozygous deletion was observed in any of the AML cases or 5 cell lines.
The conflicting findings from the above studies require further investigation.
As expected, promoters of genes that are required for specific haematopoietic cell fates are often demethylated as progenitor cells differentiate, whereas genes that are responsible for maintaining a stem or progenitor state such as meis homeobox 1 (MEIS1) and homeobox A9 (HOXA9) become increasingly methylated with differentiation.
Differentiation of HPCs is highly dependent on the precise timing and levels of expression of GATA factors and combinations of different regulators, such as PU.1, EPO, and ETS1.
INTRODUCTION.
When cells/DNA are exposed to carcinogens, acquisition of 5hmC and loss of 5mC occur in the promoter regions of these genes, ultimately resulting in an aberrant methylation pattern found in tumor cells.
Identical somatic activating mutations of GNAS have been identified in several types of solid tumors but not in hematologic cancers.
With either high- or standard-dose cytarabinebased induction for younger patients, between 20% and 45% of these patients will not enter remission.
We also found that missense mutations of RUNX1 preferentially (89%) located in the RHD.
Somatic mutations in other cohesin genes (SMC1A, PDS5B, WAPAL, MAU2, REC8, NIPBL, SMC5, and ESCO2) were present in <.% of our cohort (Figure 1 and supplemental Tables 2-4).
To date, biological consequences of splicing factor mutations have been tested only for U2AF35 mutants.
All final reports must address preanalytic, analytic, and postanalytic components.
All cohesin mutations were heterozygous in nature except for mutations in STAG2 and SMC1A, which are located on chromosome X and thus result in the absence of expression of a wild-type (WT) allele.
With the availability of a broad selection of test methods, laboratories may find it challenging to select the methodology and platform most suitable for their practice.
However, there is a concern that some laboratories may have had a high true false-positive rate, because one laboratory had a positive result that was not detected by any other laboratory.
Rarely, double MPL mutations occurring in cis of exon 10 have been identified.
Clinical trials conducted by the Polycythemia Vera Study Group support the use of hydroxyurea in conjunction with aspirin in patients with high-risk PV.
The incidence of acute GVHD all grades was 38% and chronic GVHD was 49%.
These patients appear to also have a longer event-free survival.
Other candidate genes currently being evaluated for prognostic importance include TET2 and RUNX1.
STRs were amplified by PCR (primer sequences are provided in supplemental Table 1) and analyzed by GeneScan analysis performed on an Applied Biosystems 3130XL.
In addition, contrary to the aforementioned models, we found that a high AMC was independently associated with a shortened OS.
Figure 6. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of gene expression with annotation by cohesin mutational status and cohesin expression. (A) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of TCGA AML patients with annotation of STAG2 low expression and STAG2 mutation. Patients with STAG2 mutations and low STAG2 expression cluster show a unique expression profile and cluster separately from patients with WT STAG2 and high expression. (B) Cohesin complex expression in STAG2 (i), RAD21 (ii), and SMC3 (iii) low expressors. Within each group of cohesin low expressors, the entire cohesin family gene complex has similarly decreased expression.
Initial treatment based on G-CSF and corticosteroids showed a moderate efficacy on neutropenia.
JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation analysis.
It has been found that an N-terminally truncated version of FOG1 is produced from an internal ATG, and that this isoform (designated FOG1S) lacks the NuRD-binding domain, altering the complexes with which it interacts.
ASXL1 mutations had no effect on the OS (P = 0.37) or leukemia free survival (0.09) (Table 3 and Figure 1).
However, all these mutations accounted for a minor proportion of patients with CMML.
EZH2 mutations were spread over several exons, but predominantly were located in the four conserved regions and, in particular, 6/10 mutations were located in the conserved catalytic SET (enhancer of zeste and trithorax) domain (amino acids 618-751), essential for the methyltransferase activity of EZH2 (Supplementary Table 4).
All together, these data suggest that PRC2 alterations seem to be haploinsufficient in the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies.
We did not identify any other clinically relevant differences in the distribution of cohesin defects.
IDH1 and IDH2 mutations were initially identified in patients with low-grade glioma and a subpopulation of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), in which a more favorable prognosis may be shown.
Other codon 515 mutations include W515A and W515R.
The mutual exclusivity of pairs of mutations was estimated with two-by-two contingencies tables and Fisher's exact test.
Given the structural similarity between D-2HG and alpha-KG, D-2HG is considered a putative oncometabolite by being a competitive inhibitor to alpha-KG-dependent dioxygenases.
In this study, we aimed to further characterize this defined cohort of CMML patients by studying five additional genes: IDH1, IDH2, NPM1, ASXL1 and EZH2.
However, treatment-related morbidity and mortality were higher in the high-dose cytarabine arm; the 5-year OS rates were 33% in the high-dose arm compared with 25% with the standard dose.
This is evident from genomic studies on patient samples of myeloid malignancies, as well as of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL), in which mutations in PRC2 components are more frequent than in myeloid malignancies.
ETO2, a SCL associated protein with the potential for transcription repression, is also absent from GATA1-repressed genes but, unlike SCL, fails to accumulate at GATA1-activated genes.
Signal transduction  N-RAS, K-RAS, and H-RAS are three key members of the RAS family.
Therefore, as shown in Figure 1a, in total 81.5% of cases harbored at least one molecular aberration (range: 1-7) with a median of two genes being mutated (range: 1-5).
Whole-exome sequencing and targeted multiamplicon deep sequencing.
Patients with antecedent hematologic disease or treatment-related secondary leukemia are considered poor-risk, unless they have favorable cytogenetics, such as t(8;21), inv(16), t(16;16), or t(15;17).
Hematopoiesis involves an elaborate regulatory network of transcription factors that coordinates the expression of multiple downstream genes, and maintains homeostasis within the hematopoietic system through the accurate orchestration of cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival.
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a clonal hematopoietic malignancy characterized by myeloproliferative or myelodysplastic features.
The randomized French ALFA-9801 study (N = 468) showed that idarubicin induction (the standard 12 mg/m2 x 3 days or intensified with 12 mg/m2 x 4 days) compared with high-dose daunorubicin (up to 80 mg/m2) yielded a significantly higher CR rate in patients aged 50 to 70 years (80% vs. 70%, respectively; P = .03).
Interestingly, GATA2 has been identified as a novel susceptibility gene for coronary artery disease.
These are broadly categorized into mutations involving epigenetic regulators (EZH2, ASXL1, TET2, DNMT3A, IDH1 and IDH2), spliceosome components (SF3B1, SRSF2, U2AF35 and ZRSR2), DNA-damage response genes (TP53) and transcription regulators and signaling molecules (JAK2, KRAS, NRAS, NPM1 and RUNX1).
The BCL6/BCOR co-repressor complex plays an important role in early embryonic development.
Univariate analysis identified ASXL1 (HR: 2.0, 95% CI: 1.5-2.7; P<0.0001), SRSF2 (HR: 1.6, 95% CI: 1.1-2.4; P = 0.01), EZH2 (HR: 1.9, 95% CI: 1.1-3.4; P = 0.03) and IDH1 (HR: 2.5, 95% CI: 1.1-5.6; P = 0.02) mutations as being prognostically detrimental for survival.
Morbidity and mortality in PV and ET is related to thrombophilia and, along with PMF, the progression to acute leukemia.
Less conspicuously, SF3B1 mutations were confined to 5-7 amino acid positions within the domains corresponding to exons 14-15, of which *50 % of the mutations were accounted for the K700E.
A mechanism that repairs damaged DNA throughout the cell cycle.
Of note, Hoshino et al reported the generation and analysis of Gata2 hypomorphic mutant mice that resembles human congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.
Most patients who received ruxolitinib had improvement in symptoms; the majority of patients who received placebo had worsening of symptoms (Fig. 2B).
The currently used scores for survival prognostication in PMF include IPSS, DIPSS and DIPSS-plus; the latter incorporates karyotype, consistent with the major prognostic contribution of karyotype in other myeloid malignancies including AML and MDS.
In an analysis of patients with CBF AML treated on CALGB trials (n = 110), c-KIT mutations among patients with inv(16) were associated with a higher cumulative incidence of relapse at 5 years (56% vs. 29%; P = .05) and decreased 5-year OS rate (48% vs. 68%) compared with wild-type cKIT; in multivariate analysis, the presence of c-KIT mutations remained a significant predictor of decreased OS in the subgroup with inv(16).
The use of immunophenotyping and molecular markers to monitor minimal residual disease (MRD) in adult AML has not yet been incorporated into postremission monitoring strategies, except in patients with APL.
GATA factors also act sequentially to regulate lineage determination during hematopoiesis by exerting variable repressive effects at the PU.1 locus.
Recently, mutations in a gene encoding a spliceosomal protein, SF3B1, were discovered in a distinct form of MDS with ring sideroblasts.
In an international study of 1054 patients with PMF, the overall median survival was found to be 5.8 years, but considerable variability was observed.
The cohesin complex presents a novel pathway affected by recurrent mutations in AML.
Secondary AML, either related to prior myelodysplasia or prior chemotherapy, also increases, along with a higher rate of multidrug resistance protein expression.
In addition to the discovery in patients with myeloid malignancies of mutations in genes that primarily function in regulating DNA methylation or post-translational histone modifications, various previously characterized class I and class II alleles have recently been found to affect the epigenome as part of their transforming activity.
METHODS.
Mutant SF3B1 has been postulated to down-regulate several key gene networks essential in mitochondrial pathways.
Spleen Size.
Only 1 patient with favorable cytogenetics had a mutation in a cohesin gene (SMC1A), whereas the majority of patients with cohesin gene mutations had intermediate risk cytogenetics, most showing a normal karyotype (supplemental Tables 1 and 2-6).
To determine the functional consequences of spliceosomal mutations on splicing, we performed whole mRNA deep sequencing.
Table 3. Indications for JAK2 and MPL Mutation Testing.
Among patients with FLT3-ITD and NK-AML, median OS from the time of diagnosis ranged from 6 to 12 months.
Congenital neutropenia is a group of genetic disorders that involve chronic neutropenia and susceptibility to infections.
The NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines) are a statement of consensus of the authors regarding their views of currently accepted approaches to treatment.
Disclosures for the NCCN Acute Myeloid Leukemia Panel At the beginning of each NCCN Guidelines panel meeting, panel members review all potential conflicts of interest.
Initial reports indicated a significantly better overall survival for SF3B1 mutated cases compared to unmutated cases in MDS, while other studies showed no significant impact of the mutations on survival.
However, further studies are needed to analyze the stability of these markers, as we also found 1 patient in which the SMC1A mutation from the time of diagnosis was neither present during remission nor at the time of relapse.
Among the subgroup of patients aged 60 to 65 years (n = 299), an advantage with dose-escalated compared with standard-dose daunorubicin was observed with regard to rates of CR (73% vs. 51%), 2-year EFS (29% vs. 14%), and 2-year OS (38% vs. 23%).
Analysis from first referral may clearly lead to underestimation of survival.
Table 1. Characteristics of subjects with MDS showing 7q36.1 aberrations or EZH2 mutations.
Transgenic reporter mouse analyses have shown that regulatory regions of the IS exon (3.1 kb) recapitulate Gata2 gene expression in the para-aortic splanchnopleura region and the yolk sac blood island of mid-gestation mice embryos.
Base-excision repair (BER).
She was allografted and is still alive 1 year later.
Epigenetic pathways are involved in manipulation of the level of DNA methylation and the modification of DNA or its protein interactions, including methylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation of histone residues of nucleosomes around which the DNA double helix winds.
Treatment-related mortality rates were 6% and 17%, respectively.
As initially presented elsewhere, 81 patients with CMML-1 (n = 45) or CMML-2 (n = 36) were collected and investigated (Supplementary Information 1).
Patients with > 5% myeloblasts constituted those with advanced disease.
A recent study of patients with TET2 mutations demonstrated that low 5hmC was an unfavorable prognostic marker in TET2-mutated MDS.
Other investigators described that trisomy 13 and trisomy 21 were associated with RUNX1 mutations in AML.
Comparable 5-year DFS rates were reported in patients younger than 60 years with normal karyotype after either 4 cycles of intermediate- or high-dose cytarabine (41%) or autologous HSCT (45%).
On the basis of the same phenomenon seen in alternative splicing analysis with the use of mRNAdeep sequencing of U2AF1 mutants, among the 3 most frequently mutated spliceosomal genes, U2AF1 mutations might result in loss of function.
The lower mutation frequency in our study may be explained by our approach that we only considered mutations that could be validated by Sanger sequencing and therefore are present in at least 10% to 20% of all cells.
Consequently, the 'GATA factor switching' determines the beginning of erythroid differentiation (Fig. 4A).
Hayakawa et al showed that endogenous GATA2 is acetylated in HPCs by p300, enhancing its DNA-binding activity and transactivating potential.
In particular, studies of mouse haematopoietic development have revealed the dynamic regulation of specific target genes in the differentiation process.
These mutations were not strongly associated with clinical features such as cytopenias or blast proportion, findings that are consistent with the observation that TET2 mutations occur in diverse myeloid cancers, including myeloproliferative neoplasms, that are not characterized by defects in hematopoietic differentiation.
The use of aspirin, hydroxyurea, and phlebotomy for PV and ET, and the use of androgens, steroids, chemotherapy, and radiation therapy for PMF continues to be the mainstay of therapy.
A minority of patients present with variant translocations fusing RARA to other nuclear receptors such as promyelocytic leukaemia zinc finger (PLZF).
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a clonal, hematopoietic stem cell disorder, with overlapping features of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) and myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Besides FOG1 binding, GATA1 recruits CBP/p300, MED1, and the chromatin remodeler BRG1 to chromatin sites in a context-dependent manner.
Survival analysis of 112 patients treated according to a uniform chemotherapy protocol showed that GATA2 overexpression correlated with poor prognosis, resulting in shorter overall and event-free survival.
Postremission Therapy: Patients who achieve a CR (including CRi) with standard induction chemotherapy may receive further consolidation with these agents.
Only studies in which both IDH1 and IDH2 were sequenced are included. Mutational frequencies of ASXL1 are listed as reported in the original referenced manuscripts (this may include the controversial ASXL1 pGly646fsX12 variant (REF. 83)).
Most of these methods typically do not achieve sensitivities of less than 5% of alleles (Table 4).
She presented with aspergillosis during induction therapy and received several lines of chemotherapy because of a refractory disease.
BCORL1, also located on chromosome X, shares the similar functional activity.
NA, not available in the original publication.
None had an earlier history of radiation exposure or chemotherapy.
Importantly, clinical outcomes in patients with therapy-related AML have been shown to be significantly inferior (both in terms of relapse-free and overall survivals) compared with patients with de novo cases, except those with the therapy-related acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) subtype or the favorable-risk core binding factor (CBF) translocations.
Another option for patients who are medically fit is the purine nucleoside analogue clofarabine (currently FDA-approved only for the treatment of relapsed or refractory pediatric ALL).
The guidelines consider recommendations for patients older or younger than 60 years of age separately.
In humans, however, recent evidence indicates that acquisition of JAK2V617F may not be the primary oncogenic event and the relative predisposition to JAK2V617F mutation may be more contributory to disease phenotype.
Secondary end points included the durability of response, changes in symptom burden (assessed by the total symptom score), and overall survival.
Historically, in most large cooperative group trials, daunorubicin has been the most commonly used anthracycline at doses of 45 to 60 mg/m2 x 3 days.
Its presence even appears to adversely override favorable genetic lesions.
Treatment with the BRD4 inhibitor JQ.1 leads to a 2-fold decrease in cohesin occupancy at superenhancer sites and normalization of the expression of oncogenic drivers.
Furthermore, activated Ras signaling may alter the expression of key identity genes, which are then further dysregulated by cohesin inactivity.
Median follow-up time for survival was calculated according to the method of Korn.
The median DFS in patients who achieved a CR with low-dose cytarabine was 8 months.
To avoid infections associated with neutropenia, a large percentage of these patients are treated chronically with G-CSF to improve neutrophil production.
Findings from published reports on the prognostic effects of IDH1 mutations have been inconsistent.
The panel members agreed that transplant-based options (either matched sibling or alternate donor allogeneic HSCT, or 1-2 cycles of dose-intensive cytarabine followed by autologous HSCT) afforded a lower risk of relapse and a somewhat higher DFS as consolidation for most patients with intermediaterisk cytogenetics.
Although over 60 genes have been recently identified, there are 6 genes (TET2, SF3B1, ASXL1, SRSF2, DNMT3A, and RUNX1) that are consistently mutated in 10% or more of MDS patients.
These studies thus confirmed somatic mutations in five genes (NRAS, KRAS, BRAF, JAK2, and PTPN11) known to be mutated in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and identified recurrent mutations in GNAS that have not been previously reported in hematologic cancers.
KEY POINTS.
EZH2 encodes the histone methyltransferase that constitutes the catalytic unit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
MDS is a clonal hematopoietic disorder resulting in ineffective hematopoiesis and frequently evolving to AML.
He was treated by HSCT and is still in complete remission 2.5 years after the transplantation.
EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH1/2 mutational frequencies were similar in patients with normal versus abnormal karyotype.
Their impact on clinical parameters should also be clarified.
Given the inconsistency among currently available CMML prognostic models, their lack of strict adherence to the WHO classification system when selecting study patients and the discovery of molecular abnormalities potentially having an impact on survival, we undertook the current study with 226 single-center study patients strictly defined by the WHO, fully annotated for karyotype and also analyzed for reportedly prognostic somatic mutations.
Altogether, these findings reveal that GATA2 is a critical transcription factor that coordinates cellular proliferation and maintains megakaryocyte identity in GATA1 deficient or mutant cells.
It should be noted, however, that there are major differences in median OS between the same genotypic entities as estimated in the Mayo Clinic vs the present study: 2.5 vs 3.2 years in triple-negative, 4.1 vs 9.1 years in MPL-mutant, 4.3 vs 9.2 years in JAK2-mutant, and 8.2 vs 17.7 years in CALR-mutant patients.
Another target of this circuit is EKLF, whose expression at the progenitor stage is dependent on GATA2 and SMAD5; in contrast, the maintenance of EKLF expression in committed erythroid cells is regulated by GATA1 (Fig. 3).
In our studies in myeloid malignancies, the most commonly affected spliceosomal genes included SF3B1, U2AF1, and SRSF2.
For the European cohort, median overall survival from time of diagnosis was 9.7 years (95% CI: 7.9-12.2) (Supplementary Figure S1A); the respective values for IPSS low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2 and high-risk disease were 22.8 years (95% CI: 12.2- not reached), 10.5 years (95% CI: 7.12-23.7), 6.2 years (95% CI: 5.2-9.5) and 2.5 years (95% CI: 1.7-2.8) (P<0.0001) (Supplementary Figure S1B).
As indicated above, the two GATA2 proteins described differ in exon 5.
The age of patients with mutations was younger than those without mutations (mean+=s.e. 66.3+=24 years vs 71.5+=1.6 years, P = 0.055).
Here, we review how specific somatic alterations in epigenetic regulators lead to repatterning of the epigenome and contribute to myeloid leukaemogenesis.
The monocyte count was very low, with a median value of 0.05 G/L (25th percentile: 0.03; 75th percentile: 0.17).
Seven percent of 402 patients with ET displayed a Y- (6% of male patients) or +8, +9, 5q-, 6-, 20q-, and abnormalities of chromosome 1 and 11.
Ley and colleagues first identified somatic mutation of DNMT3A in adults with AML after whole-genome sequencing of a human sample of AML with normal cytogenetics.
In 2 large observational studies, therapy with hydroxyurea was not shown to contribute to an increased rate of transformation to acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome in patients with PV or ET.
There were no transformations in the placebo group.
Cohesin complex mutations were almost always mutually exclusive (Figure 2A).
Both univariate (P = 0.0004 and P = 0.0001, respectively) and multivariable (including karyotype and thrombocytopenia as covariates; P = 0.0002 and P = 0.02, respectively) analysis for leukemia-free survival identified SRSF2 and IDH1 mutations as being significant.
Tandem GATA-E-box elements are found at the promoters of several erythroid expressed genes, including the KLF1, GATA1, EPB, and GYPA genes, and in the HS2 beta -globin locus control region.
There is increasing evidence implicating the Polycomb-repressive deubiquitylase (PR-DUB) complex, which functions to deubiquitylate H2AK119, in a range of human malignancies.
For the entire patient cohort, the median DFS and OS were 37 and 41 weeks, respectively; patients experiencing a CR had a median OS of 72 weeks.
Sequencing data were analyzed with Illumina CASAVA1.7 software and the human genome reference sequence hg19.
Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier estimates of (a) overall survival for CMML patients with and without RUNX1 mutations (P = 0.928), and (b) acute myeloid leukemia transformation for CMML patients with and without RUNX1 mutations (P = 0.175), C-terminal mutations vs those without mutation (P = 0.022). CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
Interestingly, they found that Bmp4 mRNA was reduced approximately 2-fold in these Gata2 mutant mice, and showed that GATA2 is a direct regulator of Bmp4 transcription.
Finally, BCOR mutations in AML were often associated with a decrease in BCOR mRNA levels, absence of full-length BCOR protein, and lack or low expression of a truncated BCOR protein.
It is tasked with marking exon/intron boundaries with the capacity to functionally redefine splice sites, leading to the formation of alternative transcripts.
On the other hand, the same mutation was shown to promote splicing and exon skipping of a minigene reporter in 293T cells.
IDH1 mutations have now also been identified in chondrosarcomas, cholangiocarcinomas, colorectal cancer and thyroid cancer, and Mardis et al identified recurrent IDH1 mutations in AML.
In a recent report that evaluated the ELN risk classification in a large cohort of patients, those in the "Intermediate I" risk group (which includes all patients with NK-AML with FLT3 abnormalities and those lacking both FLT3 and NPM1 mutations), relapse-free survival was more favorable with allogeneic HSCT (94 vs. 7.9 months without allogeneic HSCT).
Mutations affecting spliceosomal genes that result in defective splicing are a new leukemogenic pathway.
An interpretive comment should be included, indicating whether the observed mutation has been previously reported in MPNs or other malignancies or whether the mutation appears to be novel.
SNV and indel discovery was performed across all samples using standard parameters and a maximum coverage of 10000.
It was first cloned as an erythroid nuclear protein, which binds to one of the enhancer regions of the globin genes.
Among the patients who underwent allogeneic HSCT, myeloablative conditioning was used in 37% of patients, whereas RIC was used in 61%.
Patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive oral ruxolitinib phosphate tablets or matched placebo.
Patients with PV are considered low risk if they are <60 years old and have no history of thrombosis or are high risk if they are >=60 years old or have a history of thrombosis.
Finally, disruption of the Gata4 and Gata6 genes results in early embryo lethality due to defects in heart tube formation and extraembryonic endoderm development, respectively.
Reverse transcription was performed in a 20 muL final volume containing 1 mug RNA, 0.5 mug random primers (10 mers), 10 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5 mM dNTPs, 5 units RNasin (Promega, Madison, WI), 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, and 200 units Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus reverse transcriptase.
In contrast, GATA2 is expressed at high levels during megakaryocyte differentiation [145], also suggesting a relevant role for GATA2 in terminal thrombopoiesis.
In the absence of GATA1, GATA2 binding is associated with an undifferentiated state, an intermediate level of PU.1 expression, and a low-level expression of its downstream myeloid target genes.
It may also be possible to estimate mutant burden based on the allele frequency calculated from next-generation sequencing data; however, there has been only limited validation of the ability of next-generation sequencing to make this type of estimation.
Patient no. 8 had Pro398Leu, which is within the inhibitory domain (aa372-411) found to keep the full transactivating potential of RUNX1.
Genotype-phenotype association.
The presence of reactive marrow fibrosis does not exclude a diagnosis of primary myelofribrosis in the presence of numerous other criteria.
Although the current evaluation of a suspected MDS includes clinical history, peripheral blood value, bone marrow morphology and architecture, flow cytometry, and cytogenetics study, many cases of true MDS remain diagnostically challenging.
Regarding treatment, TET2 mutations appear to be a genetic predictor of response to azanucleosides [(5-azacitidine (AZA) and decitabine (DAC))], primarily in higher-risk MDS, although these observations require prospective validation.
Two patients in the ruxolitinib group had a transformation to AML during the study: one patient with 7% bone marrow blasts at baseline and a history of breast cancer had AML transformation after 8 months in the study; the second patient entered the study with 2% bone marrow blasts and a trisomy 8 chromosomal abnormality at baseline and had AML transformation after 5 months in the study.
After excluding 7 polymorphisms and 9 silent mutations, 13 different aberrations (Supplementary Table 4) were detected in IDH1 (1/81; 1.2%), IDH2 (3/81; 3.7%), NPM1 (1/81; 1.2%) and EZH2 (9/81; 11.1%).
Similarly, heterozygous, somatic SF3B1 mutations (E622D) were detected in a patient with refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS) associated with marked thrombocytosis (RARS-T; Figure 1B).
We identified mutated BCOR through whole-exome sequencing of a CN-AML patient who was selected for analysis because of lack of any known mutations.
The detrimental effect of ASXL1 mutations has also been shown in MDS, AML and CMML.
ASXL1 mutations are common in myeloid malignancies, including MDS, AML, myeloproliferative neoplasm and CMML.
Collectively, deletions and point mutations of EZH2 were present in 23% of the affected subjects.
At least 27 clinically verified exon 12 mutations have been identified to date, including amino acid substitution, deletions, and duplications (Table 1).
Prognostic risk stratification using the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system (P = 0.17), MDAPS (P = 0.2) and the G-MDAPS (0.32) demonstrated no difference between mutated and unmutated patients.
Biological impact of mutations.
Chun et al showed that GATA2 is a target for SUMO modification and that PIASy enhances the SUMO conjugation of GATA2, especially by SUMO2.
Numerical variables have been summarized by their median and range, and categorical variables by count and relative frequency (%) of each category.
Estimates for general mutation detection indicate that approximately 1000-fold coverage is needed for a given base to achieve a 99% confidence of detecting more than 5% heterozygous mutant alleles.
When compared with other RNA splicing gene mutations that occur in MDS, the incidence of ZRSR2 mutation is much less, occurring in only about 3% of patients, precluding a formal ability to ascertain its prognostic significance.
DISCUSSION.
Two patients (patient numbers 5677 and 6184) had infection profiles compatible with MonoMAC syndrome.
UTX.
The guidelines were developed by an expert panel from the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) based on the current literature and practices in the United States and Canada.
Furthermore, using a mouse model of human GATA1 mutations present in acute megakaryocytic leukemia with Down syndrome, they demonstrated that GATA2 overexpression contributes to aberrant megakaryocyte proliferation in the absence of full-length GATA1.
Nottingham et al reported that the GATA2, FLI1, and SCL complex are recruited to the mouse Runx1 enhancer, placing RUNX1 directly downstream of these factors in the transcriptional network that governs HSC emergence.
For example, in a specimen with 40% mutant alleles, it is unclear whether the sample is actually composed of 40% cells with a monoallelic mutation or 20% cells with a biallelic mutation.
Bone marrow from patients with exon 12 mutation often exhibits nonspecific morphology, with isolated erythroid proliferation and absence of prominent megakaryocyte atypia and clustering.
A similar proportion of patients in each treatment arm received consolidation with a third chemotherapy cycle (26%-27%), autologous HSCT (10%-11%), and allogeneic HSCT (27%-29%).
Recently, Tripic et al investigated which proteins from among those known to be associated with GATA1, might consistently distinguish active from repressive GATA1 complexes.
Figure 2. Provisional diagnostic algorithm for neutrophilia and genetically informed treatment options. FISH probes for myeloid-associated cytogenetic abnormalities can be used to complement standard karyotype analysis to establish the presence of a clonal myeloid disorder. Cytogenetic/FISH or molecular evaluation of rearranged PDGFRA/B, and FGFR1 should also be considered if eosinophilia is present. Testing for JAK2 V617F, infrequently identified in CNL or atypical CML, should also be considered. The list of relevant mutations, including molecular abnormalities in complementary signaling pathways to CSF3R and SETBP1, may expand over time. For patients who are CSF3R-mutation negative, use of a JAK inhibitor (particularly if JAK2 V617F positive) or SRC kinase inhibitor could be considered since mutations in the same or related signaling pathways may be present.
In conclusion, BCOR and BCORL1 add to the growing list of genes recurrently mutated in AML.
The negative regulatory domain, which extends the amino acid residues 74-235, has no apparent homology to GATA1, GATA4, GATA5 or GATA6, but has 46% homology to the corresponding region of GATA3, which has been reported as a transcription activation domain.
For exploratory purposes, next we evaluated the prognostic influence of each gene in the cohesin complex separately in all patients, although this analysis is limited by the small number of mutated patients.
In fact, it has been found that GATA1 defects give rise to pleiotropic hematopoietic disorders depending on which particular function is impaired.
Given that GATA2 also has an essential role in mast cell development, and the fact that FOG1 represses GATA2 expression, it is possible that a cross-antagonistic regulatory loop may exist between GATA2 and FOG1.
This result is consistent with Gayther's study, Chang's study, and our previous study of TSG101 and FHIT, in which aberrant transcriptions with different deletions were frequently identified. However, PCR amplification of aberrant transcripts caused by pre-mRNA splicing that was less stringent in cancer cells than in normal tissues should be considered.
Recently, GATA2 has been identified as a new predisposing gene for familial AML/MDS.
As of writing, there were no kits cleared by the FDA for clinical use in testing for JAK2 or MPL mutations; however, it is possible that a companion diagnostic for the JAK2 V617F mutation will be developed to detect the JAK2 mutation and to quantify the response to targeted therapies.
During follow-up, 157 (32.5%) deaths were recorded in the European cohort and 246 (62%) in the Mayo cohort; 75 (16%) and 46 (12%) leukemic transformations were documented in the European and Mayo cohort, respectively.
In one study, an association was found between IDH2 mutations and poorer prognosis in the subgroup of patients with NK-AML with otherwise favorable risk (NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD).
The presence of such a mutation would reclassify patients into the next highest IPSS risk group.
If no mass effect is seen, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology should be sampled by LP.
Although the initial report did not break down remission duration by cytogenetic groups, subsequent analysis showed a 5-year relapse-free survival (continuous CR measured from time of randomization) rate of 50% for CBF AML, 32% for patients with normal karyotype, and 15% for patients in other cytogenetic categories, overall (P < .001).
The risk of malignant transformation was extremely high, because 6 of 14 patients with GATA2 mutations developed a refractory cytopenia with multilineage dysplasia and 4 patients developed AML (Figure 2B).
Furthermore, the occupied sites pinpointed novel GATA factor target genes that highlight new GATA factor dependent cell regulatory pathways.
Mutations in genes of the cohesin complex are recurrent mutations in AML with a strong association with NPM1 mutations.
Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall survival in patients of the European series depending on the mutational status (wild-type or mutated) of EZH2, ASXL1, SRSF2 and IDH1 or IDH2 mutation is presented in (a). The impact of mutations in EZH2, ASXL1, SRSF2 and IDH1 or IDH2 on the cumulative risk of transformation to acute leukemia using a competitive risk analysis is shown in (b). The P-values reported in each panel refer to the comparison of mutated and wild-type subjects. A comparison of overall survival by Kaplan-Meier estimates (c) and the cumulative risk of transformation to acute leukemia (d) in patients considered at 'mutationally high-risk' (that is, those mutated at least in one of ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2, IDH1 or IDH2) versus 'mutationally low-risk' (that is, no mutation) is presented.
Figure 3. Cumulative incidence of leukemic transformation in PMF patients stratified according to their driver mutation. Vertical tick marks indicate right-censored patients. Triple-negative patients had higher incidence of leukemic transformation compared with both CALR-mutant and JAK2-mutant patients (maximum P value equal to .043).
Herein, we review the clinical and pathological significance of these mutations as grouped by corresponding pathways that they dysregulate.
Treatment decisions for patients with significant reduction without hypoplasia or those with hypoplasia are deferred until the blood counts recover and a repeat marrow is performed to document remission status.
All amplicons from 1 patient were pooled and randomly ligated (Quick Ligation Kit, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA).
PATIENTS AND METHODS.
Although DNMT1, DNMT3B and DNMT3L have all been reported to be affected by rare somatic mutations in human malignancies, DNMT3A is the only DNMT family member that is frequently mutated in myeloid malignancies.
Inhibition of Janus kinase 2 or SRC kinase signaling downstream of mutated CSF3R is feasible and should be explored  therapeutically.
Asxl1 attenuation resulted in significant perinatal lethality, although surviving mice had defects in B-lymphopoiesis and multiple constitutional developmental defects.
Despite a relatively high frequency of TET2 mutations in MDS, its clinical significance and pathogenesis have not been well defined.
Tumor Samples and Tumor Cell Lines.
The mean coverage of all amplicons was 2484 reads per amplicon.
Examination of the bone marrow shows a myeloid hyperplasia with full maturation with <5% myeloblasts (<1% in the peripheral blood).
RUNX1 mutations have been described in the M0 subtype of AML, radiation-associated and chemotherapy-related MDS or AML, or in patients with de novo high-risk MDS; however, only a small number of patients with CMML have been examined for RUNX1 mutations, and the frequency and patterns of RUNX1 mutations in CMML remain to be defined.
Because of the strong association between NPM1 mutations and genes in the cohesin complex, we wanted to find out whether the cohesin mutations have an impact in the NPM1-mutated patient group.
Moreover, these findings raise the question of whether other tyrosine and non-tyrosine kinases may localize to the nucleus and phosphorylate histones and other nuclear regulatory complexes.
More recently, Challen et al carried out more extensive analysis in vivo by studying the effect of Haematopoietic-specific conditional Dnmt3a deletion on self-renewal in serial transplantation assays.
This mutation has also been found to be associated with wild-type CEBPA and the absence of FLT3 abnormalities (eg, FLT3-ITD or FLT3-TKD mutations).
Diagnostic bone marrow or peripheral blood samples were analyzed from 389 adult patients (aged 17-60 years) with de novo (n = 348) or secondary AML (n = 41, and of these, 35 patients had antecedent myelodysplastic syndrome and 6 patients had treatment-related secondary AML) with French-American-British classification M0-M2 or M4-M7.
[END OF ABSTRACT].
GATA2 mutation.
The discrepant findings from these studies may be a result of important differences between the studies in factors such as patient baseline characteristics, presence of concurrent genetic lesions (eg, NPM1, CEBPA mutations), or inclusion of the APL subtypes.
Several reports have described the clinical impact of splicing factor mutations.
Genetic alterations of the cohesin complex genes in myeloid malignancies.
Upon induction of GATA1 expression, GATA1 supplants these sites.
CONCLUSION.
EZH2 mutations have also been reported in MDS/MPN and primary myelofibrosis, but are less frequent in AML (1.8%).
All the 81 BM samples were re-evaluated and reclassified according to the World Health Organization system.
Changes in palpable spleen length in the ruxolitinib and placebo groups mirrored the changes in spleen volume.
Supportive Care for AML.
Moreover, alternative splicing analysis showed that exon 9 of FECH was skipped in U2AF1 mutant cases but not in U2AF1 WT cases, including those with SF3B1 mutations (supplemental Figure 8).
Although the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system was prognostic on a univariate analysis, it lost its prognostic impact on a multivariable analysis.
Recently, Huang et al have dissected the function of GATA2 in normal and aberrant megakaryopoiesis.
Table 6. Risk Stratification and Treatment in Primary Myelofibrosis.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and related myeloid neoplasms are a heterogeneous group of intractable myeloid malignancies, characterized by deregulated blood cell production with dysplastic cell morphology and a high propensity to acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Regardless, mutational profiling in PMF might clarify disease heterogeneity, refine current prognostic models, inform therapeutic decisions and provide clinical trials with a tool for better patient stratification and monitoring of the effects of novel drugs.
Indeed, we observed a higher response rate in patients with cohesin mutations treated with azacitidine.
However, the way in which BCOR and BCORL1 mutations contribute to AML development is still not clear.
High frequency of GATA2 mutations in patients with mild chronic neutropenia evolving to MonoMac syndrome, myelodysplasia, and acute myeloid leukemia.
Mutations of N-RAS and K-RAS have a higher incidence in patients with CMML, 12.3% and 14.8%, respectively.
Moreover, the physiological requirement of GATA function in humans is further supported by the identification of GATA gene mutations associated with human disease.
In both studies, these mutations were subsequently studied in larger series of AML patients.
Interestingly, SF3B1 mutations, but not other splicing factor mutations, have also been reported in 5-15 % of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), especially in high-risk cases.
INTRODUCTION.
Analysis of DNA from CD3+ cells showed a much lower frequency of the base change (2 of 15 reads), highlighting the somatic nature of this alteration.
In addition, AML with molecular lesions such as mutated NPM1 or CEBPA genes are considered provisional entities (further information on these genetic lesions is provided later).
A complete remission was obtained, but she developed a progressive loss of neutrophils, monocytes, B cells, and NK cells associated with numerous infections (Table 1 and supplemental Table 2).
ASXL1, additional sex combs-like 1; DNMT3A, DNA methyltransferase 3A; EZH2, enhancer of zeste homologue 2; NA, data have not been reported.
Figure 1. Characterization of cohesin mutations in patients with myeloid disease. (A) Structure of the cohesin ring. (B) Position and disease subtype for identified cohesin mutations SMC3 (i), STAG2 (ii), and RAD21 (iii). No correlation was found with any structural motif, and no mutational hotspots were identified. (C) Frequency of cohesin family gene mutations in each myeloid malignancy. (D) Distribution of cohesin family gene mutations identified across the patient cohort.
Our data further suggest that cohesin has a cooperative role in epigenetic regulation and transcriptional programming by virtue of the higher response rate in cohesin mutant MDS patients treated with HMAs.
In a multivariable analysis that included clinical features and other mutations, mutations in five genes - TP53, EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, and ASXL1 - were independently associated with decreased overall survival.
There were 55 CMML1 and 26 CMML2 patients.
The SETBP1 gene encodes a 170-kDa nuclear protein that binds SET and interacts with a tumor suppressor gene (PP2A), playing a critical role in cell proliferation.
DNA SEQUENCING.
Cohesin haploinsufficiency is thus the operative pathophysiologic mechanism, a notion further supported by the mutual exclusivity of cohesin mutations: haploinsufficiency for one cohesin complex member may be sufficient to initiate the myeloid transformation pathway, whereas a double hit would be deleterious.
Erik Vakil; Ayalew Tefferi.
Clinical laboratories may choose to use either commercial detection kits or laboratory-developed tests.
We also identified three samples with activating mutations of amino acid R201 in GNAS, the gene encoding the Gsalpha subunit of the heterotrimeric Gs-protein complex.
The vast majority of mutations identified across cohesin proteins were heterozygous nonsense and frameshift events, which would be anticipated to cause expression of a truncated protein.
The mutated genes most strongly associated with a specific karyotype group were TET2 and TP53.
Clinical and cytogenetic correlates of mutations.
All patients received intensive, response-adapted double induction and consolidation therapy.
However, the percentage of patients achieving a CR who did not proceed to consolidation was twice as high in the high-dose cytarabine induction arm.
The analysis of global methylation levels by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in DNMT3A-mutant AMLs did not reveal a difference in 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) levels.
Association of cohesin gene mutations with clinical characteristics.
We failed to find a survival difference between CMML patients with RUNX1 mutations and those without RUNX1 mutations.
Although genome-wide mapping studies of 5-hmC in the haematopoietic system have not yet been reported, genome-wide mapping of 5-hmC in embryonic stem cells has identified that 5-hmC is most often present at transcription start sites and within gene bodies.
Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplantation Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HCT) is currently the only therapy with curative potential for PMF; however, treatment-related mortality remains high.
When compared with patients with wild-type p53, median OS in patients with the mutation was much shorter (66 versus 6 months; P < 0.001).
The PCR products were diluted 20-fold, and 1 muL of the diluted product was used for a second round of PCR for 35 cycles using two nested primers, M2u and M2d.
IDH1 and IDH2 mutations have also been reported in several hematopoietic malignancies such as MDS, myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN), AML (de novo or secondary to MDS or MPN), and CML in blast phase.
The algorithm can be accessed online at http://www.aml-score.org/.
Loss-of-function mutations in ASXL1 have been identified in a range of myeloid malignancies, most commonly in patients with MDS, PMF or MDS/MPN overlap disorders.
This analysis suggested that RIC allogeneic HSCT was associated with improved relapse-free survival, and the authors concluded that this approach remains of interest.
These findings strengthened the importance of deregulated epigenetic modifiers in myeloid malignancy pathogenesis which had already been suggested by the finding of recurrent translocations involving histone lysine acetyltransferases (for example, lysine acetyltransferase 6A (KAT6A; also known as MOZ)-nuclear receptor co-activator 2 (NCOA2; also known as TIF2) fusion) and methyltransferases (for example, nucleoporin 98 (NUP98)-nuclear receptor binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) fusion and mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL) translocations).
It is possible that the mutations lead to distinct phenotypes by affecting different stages of splicing and/or by causing defective splicing of specific gene transcripts.
Prespecified analyses were conducted to cross-validate the modified MFSAF, version 2.0.
In our cohort, we detected one case with a homozygous mutation pattern, in detail, a splice mutation before exon 17.
Furthermore, high GATA2 expression has been associated with myeloid neoplasias having 3q rearrangements.
Cohesin complex mutation, mainly in STAG1 (1.8%), STAG2 (1.3%), and SMC3 (1.3%), were detected in a total of 5.9% of AML patients and associated with a low level expression of BAALC.
The mutation results in impaired function of the autoinhibitory region and subsequent ligand-independent thrombopoietin receptor activation.
A heterozygous missense mutation in U2AF1 (Q157R) was found in a patient with refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia (RCUD) and uniparental disomy of 2q (UPD2q; Figure 1A).
We show here that EZH2 point mutations result in a similar adverse tendency in overall survival (P = 0.076 when measured from the date of diagnosis and P = 0.026 when measured from the time of bone marrow sampling), but a larger cohort from a prospective clinical trial should be analyzed to assess this properly.
Approximately half of the laboratories performed single replicates, and half performed assays in duplicate.
In the group of NPM1-mutated AML patients (n = 137), OS and RFS were not influenced by the presence of mutations in the cohesin complex (OS: HR 1.17; 95% CI, 0.53-2.55; P = .7; supplemental Figure 3C) and (RFS: HR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.34-2.12; P = .72; supplemental Figure 3D).
Mutations in the spliceosome machinery, a novel and ubiquitous pathway in leukemogenesis.
A CNL patient with the CSF3R T618I membrane proximal mutation was treated with ruxolitinib and exhibited a marked, durable decrease in white blood cell and absolute neutrophil counts and resolution of thrombocytopenia (initially reported as a 5-month response, now still responding after 11 months).
These methods easily achieve analytical sensitivities of 1% mutant alleles.
A randomized phase III study has shown that in patients with neutropenia undergoing induction chemotherapy for AML or MDS, posaconazole was significantly more effective in preventing invasive fungal infections than fluconazole or itraconazole, and was associated with improved OS outcomes.
Two-hundred and twenty-six patients with WHO-defined CMML and who were seen at the Mayo Clinic from 1997 to 2007 were included in the current study.
The presence of STAG2 mutation appeared to be associated with adverse clinical outcome and an increase in bone marrow blasts.
SUMMARY.
Because there was incomplete concordance, it is important that laboratories participate in proficiency testing programs that include a wide spectrum of clinical laboratories.
Previous work in a zebrafish model identified runx dependence on rad21 expression, and given the high association of RUNX1 mutations in cohesin mutant myeloid disease, we queried if this relationship would be evident in our patient cohort.
Clinically, patients with exon 12 mutations typically present with isolated erythrocytosis and suppressed erythropoietin, in contrast to the trilineage hyperplasia characteristic of patients with V617F mutation.
The 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) definition of PMF includes JAK2 (V617F) or MPL (W515) mutations as a major diagnostic criterion that unequivocally proves the clonal nature of the disease.
The complete overview of SNP array lesions has been published.
The disease poses a unique diagnostic challenge for both hematologists and pathologists because of its clinicopathologic diversity and its benign or malignant mimickers.
The Y252H mutation, which is located in the extracellular domain of MPL, confers hypersensitivity to thrombopoietin and increases the generation of megakaryocyte colonies in vitro and leads to increased thrombopoietin signaling and cell growth and survival.
If the LP is positive, intrathecal chemotherapy with cytarabine or methotrexate is recommended, given concurrently with systemic induction therapy.
ASXL1, EZH2, and UTX are members of pathways that control histone post-translational modifications.
Harada et al. observed that N-terminal mutations were highly associated with therapy-related MDS, whereas C-terminal mutations of RUNX1 preferentially occurred in de novo high-risk MDS or AML after antecedent de novo MDS.
The remainder are six novel missense mutants at RHD (nos. 1-6) and one nonsense mutant, Arg293X, in three patients (nos. 14-16); whether these mutants can induce RUNX1 functional changes needs further investigation.
Using DNA sequencing, we and others identified perturbation of TET2, located at chromosome 4q24, in 26% of the individuals with MDS.
Recurrent pneumonia was present in 5 patients and severe and chronic warts and/or genital HPV was observed in 6 patients.
BCORL1 is also a transcriptional corepressor and functional studies have shown that it can bind to class II histone deacetylases (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7), to interact with the CTBP1 corepressor, and to affect the repression of E-cadherin.
Notably,the expression rate of Gata2 was profoundly reduced in HSCs derived from Evi1-/- embryos.
However, azoles should not be given during anthracycline chemotherapy because they impair drug metabolism and can increase toxicity.
The "protective effect" of SF3B1 mutation on OS was lost in multivariate analysis, including clinical variables such as International Prognostic Scoring System score.
In addition, 5 hemopoietic cell lines (HL60, U937, Raji, KG-1, K562) and peripheral blood samples from 30 normal control were also studied.
Impact of spliceosome mutations on clinical outcome.
Besides, Bmp4 transcripts are also concentrated along the ventral aspect of the dorsal aorta in E11.5 mouse embryos.
INCB018424 is a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor, and phase I/II studies involved 153 patients with PMF or post-PV/ET MF, 34 patients with PV, and 39 with ET.
Indeed, DNMT3A encodes a methyltransferase enzyme catalyzing the addition of methyl groups to CpG dinucleotides.
Gata2 expression also rescued the embryonic lethal phenotype of the Gata1 mutation.
Consolidation therapy in this trial would be either continuation of clofarabine or intermediate-dose cytarabine.
There was no significant difference between patients with or without a mutation in the cohesin complex with regard to gene expression of MN1, ERG, EVI1, MLL5, and WT1.
Results of MPL assays should be reported in a similar fashion as those described above for JAK2.
Aplastic anemia is characterized by a reduced number of HSCs and fatty replacement in the bone marrow.
Diagnosis.
Abnormalities in seven genes were significantly associated with poor overall survival in univariate analyses (Fig. 2, and Fig. 4 in the Supplementary Appendix).
For the assessment of bone marrow fibrosis, paraffin sections were stained with Gomori silver impregnation technique, and fibrosis was assessed semiquantitatively following the European consensus guidelines.
Treatments are based on the risk profile of individual patients.
The cutoff date was July 1, 2012.
What Are the Currently Known JAK2 and MPL Mutations?
In conclusion, even though plentiful interesting data about GATA2 have already been collected, many questions remain that might stimulate future research.
For this strategy to be better used, potential transplant options should be considered during induction therapy, and unrelated donor options/searches explored earlier in the disease management.
Genes differentially expressed between these 2 groups were then identified using the Bioconductor package limma and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted (ie, to correct for multiple hypothesis testing) P values of <=.001; specifically, we used the limma pipeline of voom() ---> lmFit() ---> eBayes(), which can be applied to both microarray and RNA-sequencing data.
Pleotrophic and lineage-specific cytokines, transcription factors, bone marrow microenvironment, and numerous signaling proteins play a vital function in promoting expansion and guiding the differentiation of progenitor cells.
A proficiency test for JAK2 V617F is available from the College of American Pathologists (2013 Surveys and Anatomic Pathology Education Programs, http://www.cap.org/apps/docs/proficiency_testing/2013_surveys_catalog.pdf, last accessed November 28, 2012).
CONCLUSION.
ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations were independently associated with poor survival, but only ASXL1 mutations held their prognostic relevance (HR: 1.4; P = 0.04) independent of the Dynamic IPSS (DIPSS)-plus model, which incorporates cytogenetic risk.
The first study to identify this high-risk subgroup was HOVON.
Five hundred nanograms of this PCR product were hybridized to the SureSelect Human All Exon Kits Version 2 (Agilent Technologies), covering 44 Mb of the human exome during 24 hours.
Although we identified 2 mutant copies of U2AF1 (21q22.3) in a sAML case with trisomy 21 (supplemental Figure 2), all other 19 cases of trisomy 21 screened for this mutation were negative.
Use of growth factors may be a confounding factor in the interpretation of pathology results from bone marrow evaluations.
The different parental origins of the remaining chromosome 7 within the same family led to the hypothesis of the existence of a "mutator gene" located outside of chromosome 7.
Emberger syndrome is an autosomal-dominant primary lymphedema with a predisposition to AML.
Using these four risk factors, a new prognostic model for overall (high risk, RR 4.4, 95% CI 2.9-6.7; intermediate risk, RR 2.0, 95% CI 1.4-2.9) and leukemia-free survival (high risk, RR 4.9, 95% CI 1.9-12.8; intermediate risk, RR 2.6, 95% CI 1.1-5.9) performed better than other conventional risk models and was validated in an independent cohort of 268 CMML patients.
Nucleotide positions are determined based on the cited sources.
These findings indicate that mutations in specific genes help explain the clinical heterogeneity of myelodysplastic syndromes and that the identification of these abnormalities would improve the prediction of prognosis in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall survival in patients at 'mutationally high-risk' compared with 'mutationally low-risk' in the settings of IPSS categories; a lowest and a highest IPSS category were considered, the first including IPSS low plus Intermediate-1, the latter Intermediate-2 plus high-risk categories (a). In (b), the cumulative risk of transformation to acute leukemia in the same patient populations as in (a) is shown.
Likewise, little is known about the timing of DNMT3A mutations during disease evolution.
PMF.
Of the 53 CMML patients who had cytogenetic examinations, 30 had normal karyotypes.
Both isoforms interact with the CtBP complex.
TET2 is a putative tumor suppressor gene and mutational frequency is estimated at 16% for PV, 5% for ET, and 17% for PMF.
Patients who develop cerebellar toxicity should not be rechallenged with high-dose cytarabine in future treatment cycles.
Table 2 describes the ASXL1 mutational prevalence in 179 patients with CMML.
Given the poor prognosis of these disorders, the potential applicability of JAK or SRC kinase inhibitors is an important bench-tobedside implication of the discovery of activating CSF3R mutations.
A new GATA2 transcript variant with an additional exon has been included recently in the NCBI database; however, no further information on this transcript has been reported.
We found a strong association between these mutations and mutations in NPM1.
Allogeneic HSCT in first CR was associated with significantly lower 3-year relapse (32% vs. 81%; P < .001) and higher 3-year leukemia-free survival rates (32% vs. 15%; P < .001) compared with the chemotherapy-only group.
We used the first cohort of 483 European patients studied within 1 year of diagnosis, to select out which one of these mutations predicted worse outcome.
In contrast, the membrane proximal mutations exhibit receptor activation in the complete absence of ligand, suggesting distinct mechanisms of activation of these classes of CSF3R mutations.
Sequencing analyses have demonstrated that the SRSF2 mutation appears to be an early event in the development of MDS, perhaps making it a relevant therapeutic target.
Other options for this group include clinical trials or multiple courses (3-4) of high-dose cytarabine consolidation.
Details of the modeling strategy are provided in the Methods section in the Supplementary Appendix.
Study population and definitions.
The median follow-up was 4.44 years (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.12 to 6.19), during which time 332 patients died and the data for 107 were censored at the last date they were known to be alive.
In a more recent report, Tet2-knockout mice developed a disease with MDS-like features including erythroid progenitor expansion.
When 310 patients genotyped for these mutations were analyzed, the presence of SF3B1 mutations was associated with longer survival and U2AF1 mutations with shorter survival, whereas SRSF2 mutations had no effect on survival.
However, if neurologic symptoms (eg, headache, confusion, altered sensory input) are present at diagnosis, an initial CT/MRI should be performed to rule out the possibility of intracranial hemorrhage or presence of mass/lesion.
Single-agent use of any of these drugs have comparable response rates of approximately 20% that last 1-2 years.
In a joint study conducted by the Dutch-Belgian and Swiss cooperative groups (HOVON/SAKK) evaluating the correlation between cytogenetics and OS outcomes in patients aged 60 years or younger with AML (N = 1975), the 4-year OS rate in patients with monosomal karyotype was 4% compared with 26% in those with complex karyotype (but without monosomal karyotype).
Interestingly, performing genome-wide microarray experiments in G1ME cells, they identified four novel and direct targets of GATA2 in megakaryocytes including conserved elements within intron 1 of Hhex, and Slamf1, Sfpi1, and Lmo2.
However there appear to be discrepancies in this impact among different studies.
These latter patients showed a higher incidence of leukemic transformation compared with both CALR-mutant (P = .016) and JAK2-mutated patients (P = .043).
Based on studies with D. melanogaster homologues, ASXL1 is thought to associate with both repressive PcG and activating Trithorax complexes.
Mutations in histone-modifying enzymes EZH2 mutations and genetic loss of PRC2 function in myeloid malignancies.
Detection of JAK2 and MPL mutations has been incorporated into routine diagnostic algorithms for these diseases.
The Gata2 promoter responds to BMP4 signaling, which also initiates Fli1 expression in Xenopus, and as such BMP4-singnaling is another candidate initiator of the circuit.
CpG islands contain a high concentration of CpG sites and are frequently near promoter regions.
In addition to the known cytogenetic abnormalities, we identified a single case with a focal deletion encompassing ETV6, a gene that is recurrently involved in translocations in acute leukemia but is not known to be mutated in myelodysplastic syndromes (Fig. 3 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Whether Pro398Leu has a decreased transactivating ability requires further study.
Exploratory end points included changes in body weight and the JAK2V617F allele burden, achievement of independence from transfusions, and additional patient-reported outcomes (see the Supplementary Appendix).
Western blot analysis demonstrated that protein levels of GATA2 are lower in patients with aplastic anemia than those in normal subjects.
Intermediate-1-risk patients who are transfusion dependent or with unfavorable cytogenetics, intermediate-2-risk patients, and highrisk patients are candidates for investigational drug therapy or allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
Patients were eligible for the study if they were 18 years of age or older and had primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythemia vera myelofibrosis, or post-essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis according to 2008 World Health Organization criteria, with a life expectancy of 6 months or longer, an International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS) score (see Table S1 in the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) of 2 (intermediate-2 risk) or 3 or more (high risk), an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 3 or less (on a scale from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater disability; see the Supplementary Appendix for further details), less than 10% peripheral-blood blasts, an absolute peripheral-blood CD34+ cell count of more than 20x106 per liter, a platelet count of 100x109 per liter or more, and palpable splenomegaly (>=5 cm below the left costal margin).
Finally, the question of whether the recently characterized small molecular inhibitor of SF3B1 might have a therapeutic role in the treatment of myeloid neoplasms with splicing factor mutations remains to be addressed.
Mutations in the analyzed genes were used as categorical variables.
Recently, we identified high-frequency oncogenic mutations in  the granulocyte-colony stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R) in CNL and in some patients with atypical chronic myeloid leukemia.
Cancer-associated mutations of IDH1 and IDH2 are heterozygous and occur at one of three highly conserved arginine residues: IDH1-R132, IDH2-R172 and IDH2-R140.
The subsequent analysis of the French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry allowed the identification of 6 additional pedigrees and 10 patients with 6 different and not previously reported GATA2 mutations (R204X, E224X, R330X, A372T, M388V, and a complete deletion of the GATA2 locus).
Its estimated prevalence is more than 95% in PV, 50% in ET, and 50% in PMF, and its value as a diagnostic marker is improved by a low prevalence in non-MPN myeloproliferative diseases.
Median survivals were 22 months for CMML-1 and 14 months for CMML-2.
To explore whether these specific molecular assets associated with unique gene expression profiles, we compared CD34+ cells from 9 mutationally high and 11 mutationally low-risk patients, randomly selected in the European cohort.
Other cytogenetic abnormalities included del20q-5 (2%), +21-3 (1%), +14-2 (1%), +11-2 (1%) and isochromosome 17q-2(1%).
Using a microarray screening approach, miR-144 and miR-451 were identified as GATA1-regulated miRNAs.
Figure 5. Kaplan-Meier analysis of survival of PMF patients stratified according to their driver mutation and subdivided according to their IPSS risk. Vertical tick marks indicate right-censored patients. (A) "Lower" IPSS risk subgroup, including patients with low or intermediate-1 IPSS risk: CALR-mutant patients had longer survival compared with either JAK2 (V617F)-mutant (P = .011) or triple-negative patients (P = .001). (B) "Higher risk" subgroup, including patients with intermediate-2 or high IPSS risk: CALR-mutant patients had longer survival compared with the remaining genetic subgroups (maximum P value equal to .023).
Standard tumor lysis prophylaxis includes hydration with diuresis, alkalinization of the urine, and allopurinol administration or rasburicase treatment.
The risk of hemorrhage secondary to acquired von Willebrand syndrome may preclude the use of aspirin in patients with a ristocetin cofactor activity <30%.
ETV6, Ets variant 6, is an ETS transcriptional repressor (locus of 12p13) and plays a critical role in embryogenesis and hematopoiesis.
ABSTRACT.
The prognostic value of JAK2V617F in PV and ET is yet to be established.
This probably relates to the partially non-overlapping roles of DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B, and suggests a possible unique role for DNMT3A in haematopoiesis.
Furthermore, gene expression analysis of mutant megakaryocytes and erythroid progenitors showed significantly increased levels of GATA2, indicating that FOG1/NuRD interaction is required for the earlier described 'GATA switch'.
Patients with cohesin gene alterations had poor OS compared with patients without cohesin lesions (27.2 vs 39.9; P = .023).
Furthermore, GATA2 suppresses adipocyte differentiation through direct inhibition of adipogenic factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARy), indicating that fatty marrow replacement in patients with aplastic anemia can be explained by downregulation of GATA2 and overexpression of PPARy.
All patients with CMML were managed with supportive care, 45 of them received low-dose cytarabine or an oral chemotherapeutic agent (hydroxyurea, melphalan or 6-thioguanine) before transformation to AML.
Overall, MPL W515L or W515K mutations are present in patients with PMF and ET at a frequency of approximately 5% and 3%, respectively.
FLT3-ITD occurs in approximately 30% of cases and is more common than FLT3-TKD mutations, which occur in approximately 10% of patients.
Thus, the cohesin-complex is an essential structure during cell division.
In addition, SF3B1 are mutated in several solid cancers, including breast, bladder, endometrial and other cancers, although the mutation frequencies were low.
The Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test were used to estimate the distribution of OS and RFS, and to compare differences between survival curves, respectively.
Baseline characteristics were similar in the two groups (Table 1).
Similarly, nearly one third of patients with RARS-T were found to have a JAK2 mutation.
Mutations have been described previously in congenital neutropenia that is isolated (eg, mutations of ELANE), associated with immunologic defects (eg, mutations of CXCR4 or WAS genes), or involves extra-hematopoietic manifestations, the most frequent being HAX1 (Kostmann disease), SDBS (Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome), or G6PC3.
One patient had a silent mutation at RHD (no. 9), which had been reported earlier; it is considered to have no effect on function.
This expressional change of GATA factors during cell differentiation is termed the 'GATA factor switching'.
Overall, we detected a GATA2 mutation in 14 white patients.
Figure 3. Janus kinase signalling affects the epigenome through direct and indirect activities. Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) and JAK2 have recently been shown to be able to enter the nucleus and to directly phosphorylate (P) tyrosine 41 of histone H3 (H3Y41). At least one consequence of H3Y41 phosphorylation is displaced binding of the repressive protein heterochromatin protein 1alpha (HP1alpha) from chromatin. The genome-wide effects of H3Y41 phosphorylation and HP1alpha localization in contexts with and without JAK overactivity have yet to be published. Nor is it clear exactly how JAK1 and JAK2 enter the nucleus. In addition to phosphorylating H3Y41, nuclear JAK2 has been shown to phosphorylate protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). This thereby inhibits PRMT5 activity and results in reduced histone H2A and H4 arginine methyltransferase activity. Mutated forms of JAK2, as seen most prominently in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms, result in increased kinase activity on the substrate PRMT5. H4R3me2, histone H4 dimethylated on arginine 3.
The 16 specimens having a high rate of false-negative results tended to have lower JAK2 allele burden in those laboratories doing quantitative assays, suggesting that the false-negative results were mostly due to assays with lower analytical sensitivity.
Objective prognostic markers have yet to be established for PV and ET, and the risk of thrombosis continues to be the main criteria for risk stratification.
Figure 3. Overall Survival. Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall survival, including 4 months of additional follow-up after the primary analysis, are shown. There were 13 deaths in the ruxolitinib group (8.4%) and 24 deaths in the placebo group (15.6%) during a median follow-up period of 51 weeks. Tick marks indicate censoring times for individual patients.
Studies of embryonic stem cells have demonstrated enrichment of 5-hmC in CpG dinucleotides near transcriptional start sites and in intragenic regions, and 5-hmC placement in these regulatory regions is associated with increased gene expression.
There was an improvement of 50% or more in the total symptom score at 24 weeks in 45.9% of patients who received ruxolitinib as compared with 5.3% of patients who received placebo (P<0.001).
Only mutations in the TP53 gene have been clearly associated with poor prognostic markers, such as a complex karyotype (having three or more chromosomal abnormalities), and have been reported to independently predict survival among patients at intermediate risk, as ascertained with the use of the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS).
The pathophysiology of MDS has not been well illustrated.
Genetic and functional studies have suggested that there are at least two classes of myeloid leukaemia disease alleles that contribute to haematopoietic transformation: class I alleles, which confer a growth advantage by activating downstream effectors of various signalling pathways including members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT), PI3K and RAS-MAPK pathways; and class II alleles, which alter the expression of key transcriptional targets in myelopoiesis.
It is currently unknown whether 5-fC and 5-caC serve any function other than as oxidative by-products of 5-hmC and intermediates in DNA demethylation.
Re-evaluation using more sensitive techniques revealed higher frequencies: 95% to 97% in PV, approximately 55% in ET, and approximately 65% in PMF, suggesting that insensitive assay methods (eg, Sanger sequencing, which has an analytic sensitivity of 20%) generated a significant number of false-negative results.
Recurrent hypomorphic cohesin defects and cohesin low expression were identified in a significant proportion of patients with MDS and AML.
MATERIALS AND METHODS.
Further analysis involves a JAK2V617 PB mutation screen and measurement of a serum EPO level.
In addition, they indicate that PMF genotypes should now be considered also in designing clinical trials on the use of novel drugs for treatment of PMF.
At the time of the prospectively defined data cutoff (median follow-up, 32 weeks), 134 patients in the ruxolitinib group (86.5%) and 78 in the placebo group (50.6%) were receiving the randomly assigned study drug.
Mutations in PTEN/MMAC1 are most frequently found in advanced cancers.
IDH mutations commonly involve exon 4 and affect three specific arginine residues: Arg132 (IDH1), Arg172 (IDH2), and Arg140 (IDH2).
JAK2 exon-12 mutations are present in the majority of patients who were JAK2V617 negative and 3% of patients with PV overall.
IDH1 and IDH2: metabolic inputs.
In particular, members of the jumonji-domain-containing (JMJC) family of histone lysine demethylases, which demethylate lysines 9 and 36 of histone H3 (H3K9 and H3K36), have been shown to be inhibited by 2-HG.
In the recent report of the Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, no mutations in STAG1 were detected, whereas the mutation frequency in STAG2, SMC1A, SMC3, and RAD21 was slightly higher (2.5%-3.5%).
Patients with DNMT3A mutations present with higher peripheral white blood cell counts and frequently also harbour nucleophosmin (NPM1), FMS-related tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) and IDH1 mutations.
A limitation of allele-specific qPCR is that, in many cases, signal is generated in the mutant PCR reaction at high CT counts even for known negative samples.
Hair follicles from 20 of the 62 AML patients were collected to evaluate constitutional DNA for LOH analysis.
Younger patients (age < 50 years) who received high-dose cytarabine induction and consolidation in the SWOG trial had the best OS and DFS rates at 4 years (52% and 34%, respectively) compared with those who received standard-dose induction and consolidation (34% and 24%, respectively) or standard induction with high-dose consolidation (23% and 14%, respectively).
Patient pedigree 1 samples were obtained after written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and were stored at the HIMIP (Hematologie-Inserm Midi-Pyrenees) collection (declared to the Ministry of Higher Education and Research as DC 2008-307 collection 1).
Both GATA1 and GATA2 bind the PU.1 gene at two highly conserved regions.
To avoid any misunderstanding, we included information as to which cases were analyzed by whole exome sequencing in supplemental Table 2.
We believe that there is a major practical relevance of the observations from the current study in terms of disease prognostication and therapeutic decision making.
For instance, SF3B1 mutations may affect splicing of transcripts coding for proteins associated with iron handling in erythroid precursors, leading to RS.
Our data indicate that the PTEN/MMAC1 gene may not play a major role in AML.
Radiation of all blood products is advised in all patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy, particularly for patients receiving fludarabine-based regimens and those undergoing HSCT.
IDH1 and IDH2 catalyse an essential step in the Krebs cycle that converts isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate in an NADP+-dependent manner.
Cytogenetics and SNP-A analyses.
Risk stratification in PV and ET is based on thrombotic risk, and survival in PMF is estimated by the International Prognostic Scoring System.
In the current study, we found aberrant PTEN/MMAC1 RT-PCR products in 24% of AML patients, 80% of hemopoietic cell lines, and 13% of normal controls.
In our cases and in other cases reported with germline GATA2 mutations, no clear correlation between genotype and phenotype can be identified, suggesting that these clinical presentations are a spectrum of the same disease.
GATA1, GATA2 and GATA3 are expressed principally in hematopoietic cell lineages.
All complete blood count differentials and PB smears were evaluated for presence of circulating IMCs, defined by the presence of any of the following cells in circulation: myeloblasts, myelocytes, metamyelocytes and promyelocytes.
Consistent with the coordinated changes in gene expression that occur during haematopoietic differentiation, researchers have observed regular patterns of DNA methylation on differentiation into specific haematopoietic lineages.
The median age of diagnosis is 67 years, with 54% of patients diagnosed at 65 years or older (and approximately a third of these diagnosed at >= 75 years of age).
The patients or their parents gave their written informed consent for genetic testing.
Online databases, such as the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC; Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer, http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/cosmic, last accessed February 19, 2013) and the Database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (dbSNP; National Center for Biotechnology Information, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp, last accessed February 19, 2013), are particularly useful for determining whether an uncommon abnormality has been previously reported.
Another patient (no. 21) had two frameshift mutations in RHD; eight clones harbored 297_298insGGAC resulting in Thr101fsX111 and nine clones harbored 343_344insGG resulting in Ala115fsX118, the remaining one clone was wild type.
Earlier studies have shown that chromosomal translocations or mutations in the coding region of RUNX1, especially in the Runt homology domain (RHD) (exons 3-5), disrupt the function of RUNX1.
For this study, we considered complete remission, partial remission, and hematologic improvement in any cell lineage as response and stable disease, death, progression, or relapse during therapy as nonresponse.
PATIENTS AND METHODS.
Whether this pattern is due to an acquired uniparental disomy 7q as described as common abnormality in the literature for myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm is not known.
The most prominent examples are from recent genome-wide and candidate-gene studies that have identified somatic alterations in genes that encode proteins  regulating DNA methylation and post-translational histone modifications.
In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding the biological properties and functions of the GATA2 transcription factor in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, Florida (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary figure two).
These outcomes with dose-escalated daunorubicin seemed similar to those with idarubicin (12 mg/m2 x 3 days) from the ALFA-9801 study, in which the 3-year EFS and OS rates were 30% and 40%, respectively.
Fig. 3. Transcriptional network involved in hematopoietic stem cells emergence.  Diagram showing the regulatory circuit among GATA2, FLI1 and SCL/TAL1.  Solid lines represent direct binding interactions.  Dotted lines represent indirect binding interactions.  NOTCH1 and BMP4 signaling pathways might initiate GATA2 and FLI1 expression, which then autoregulate each other and combine to initiate SCL transcription.  Afterwards, GATA2, FLI1, and the SCL complex are recruited to the RUNX1 enhancer, activating its transcription.  BMP4 transcription is dependent on GATA2.  At the progenitor stage, EKLF activation is also dependent on GATA2 and SMAD5.
Genotyping of germ-line DNA from buccal swabs revealed that the mutations in these 10 genes were somatic, except for those in MET (E168D in three samples), EGFR (T790M in one sample), and CDH1 (A617T in three samples).
Table 3. Univariate and multivariable overall and leukemia-free survival analysis for 226 patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
Eighteen patients (8%) had chromosomal translocations that did not fit into any specific category.
CBL mutations were detected in 18.5% of patients with CMML and have been identified more generally in about 10% of patients with MDS/MPN.
Therefore, in order to elucidate the role of PTEN/MMAC1 in leukemogenesis, 62 AML cases, 5 hemopoietic cell lines, and 30 normal controls were studied.
SAMPLES FROM STUDY PATIENTS.
According to our preliminary results, U2AF1 mutations seem to be most commonly associated with ASXL1 and TET2 mutations, whereas SF3B1 can occur in the context of RUNX1 mutations (data not shown).
For the Mayo cohort, median survival from time of referral was 5 years and significantly different among DIPSS-plus risk groups (P<0.0001); the median survivals for low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2 and high-risk groups were 18.7, 8.3, 5.2 and 2.3 years (Supplementary Figure S3).
Mutations in one or more of these genes were present in 137 of the 439 patients (31.2%).
Differences in survival were assessed using the log-rank test.
Notably, we found that patients with C-terminal mutations had a significantly higher risk of AML transformation (P = 0.023) and a shorter time to AML progression compared with mutation-negative patients (median 6.8 months vs 28.3 months, P = 0.022, Figure 2b), whereas the N-terminal mutations had no influence on outcome (P = 0.955 for overall survival and P = 0.759 for time to AML progression).
This latter condition is characterized by increased bone marrow cellularity, multilineage dysplasia, severe cytopenia involving high transfusion requirement, unfavorable cytogenetics, and poor survival.
We performed genomewide analysis of copy-number changes in a subgroup of 75 samples, using Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays.
Association of 'mutationally high risk' status with a specific molecular signature.
In a phase 1-2 trial of ruxolitinib (INCB018424, Incyte), a potent inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK2, patients with myelofibrosis had durable reductions in splenomegaly and improvements in myelofibrosis-related symptoms, regardless of their status with respect to the JAK2V617F mutation.
National Cancer Institute Drug Dictionary: http://www.cancer.gov/drugdictionary .
The HR was 1.83 (95% CI, 1.69-1.99, P <.001), that is, there was a 1.83-fold increase in hazard for a 1-point increase in the sum of weights.
However, these mutations often occur together in the same patient, and several are associated with established prognostic markers.
A recent analysis that evaluated the prognostic value of the ELN risk classification (based on data from the German AML96 study) showed that for patients aged 60 years and younger, median relapse-free survival was shorter for the Intermediate I than for the Intermediate II group (7.9 vs. 39.1 months, respectively).
Cross-sectional deep-sequencing analysis for clonal hierarchy demonstrated STAG2, SMC3, and RAD21 mutations to be ancestral in 18%, 18%, and 47% of cases, respectively, and each expanded to clonal dominance concordant with disease transformation.
Since 1994, multiple (3-4) cycles of high-dose cytarabine therapy have been the standard consolidation regimen for patients younger than 60 years with either good- or intermediate-risk cytogenetics.
In this analysis, the cohort was significantly separated into three prognostic risk groups, that is, at 3 years 33.9% of EZH2-mutated patients, 49.7% of EZH2/TET2 wild-type patients and 89.8% of TET2-mutated cases were alive (P<0.001).
The activity of the GATA2 transcription factor is also modulated by post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation, sumoylation and ubiquitination.
The 2 reads originated from contamination by a small amount of the mutated clone.
A few gene mutations are highly specific to MDS or myelodysplasia, whereas a number of chimeric genes and other mutations, including those in MPN1 and CEBPA, are highly specific to AML.
Identification of a germline GATA2 R396Q mutation in pedigree 1.
Amplified DNA was used for mutation discovery.
In addition, more recent work by Iwama and colleagues indicates that loss of BMI1 results in a pathological haematopoiesis that mimics many aspects of human PMF.
The most widely used methods for the detection of V617F involve allele-specific qPCR.
The World Health Organization (WHO), first in 2001 and again in 2008, began reclassifying these disorders in light of evolving histologic, cytogenetic, and molecular information.
Of the 4 RAD21 mutated patients, 3 harbored a concomitant NPM1 mutation, and 1 of the 2 SMC1 mutated patients was also NPM1 mutated (supplemental Tables 2-6).
LOH analysis in the 10q23 region and the RNA transcript of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in specimens from AML and hemopoietic cell lines were also examined.
Their involvement in AML emerged from in-solution whole-exome capture followed by massively parallel sequencing of paired leukemic cells at diagnosis and normal hematopoietic cells at the time of complete remission from patients with AML.
This international collaborative study, approved by the individual center institutional review boards, included 879 patients with PMF diagnosed according to the 2008 WHO criteria;1 patients with the 'prefibrotic' variant were excluded.
MDS comprise a heterogeneous group of acquired clonal hemato poietic disorders characterized by dysplasia of the myeloid, erythroid and/or megakaryocytic lineages.
Overall, in 40% of the subjects showing 7q36.1 aberrations or EZH2 mutations, TET2 was affected as well.
The study was designed to enroll 240 patients, providing 97% power to detect a treatment difference in spleen-volume response at a two-sided alpha level of 0.05, assuming a response rate of 30% or more for ruxolitinib and a response rate of 10% or less for placebo.
We identified 2 cases with germline known rare nonsynonymous alterations, specifically a germline alteration in STAG1 (p.E760D) with population allelic frequency of 0.01, and a novel alteration in WAPAL (p.G230V; supplemental Table 4).
Estey et al prospectively evaluated a protocol in which patients aged 50 years and older with unfavorable cytogenetics would be evaluated for a RIC allogeneic HSCT.
Despite the optimism, it is increasingly apparent that pathogenicity in BCR-ABL1-negative MPN is more complex than for chronic myeloid leukemia, and a pathognomonic mutation may not be forthcoming.
To further clarify the significance of GATA2 overexpression in AML, our group has investigated for the first time the prevalence of GATA2 overexpression by real-time RT-PCR in a large series of AML patients, correlated the results to cytogenetics and other molecular markers, and studied its prognostic relevance.
This model was also predictive of LT: high risk, RR 4.9 (95% CI 1.9-12.8) and intermediate risk, RR 2.6 (1.1-5.9).
Compared with the very-low-risk category, the estimated HR were 4.2 (95% CI, 1.4-12, P = .007) for the low risk, 10.2 (95% CI, 3.6-28.6, P <.001) for the intermediate risk, 37.5 (95% CI, 13.3-105.8, P <.001) for the high risk, and 88.6 (95% CI, 30.3-259, P <.001) for the very-high-risk category.
It was also found to be an independent negative prognostic indicator for survival.
Mutations and prognosis in primary myelofibrosis.
These effects are thought to be secondary to the inhibition of active DNA methylation.
Patients with residual blasts without hypoplasia may receive additional standard-dose cytarabine with an anthracycline or mitoxantrone.
In a broad survey of mutations in 439 primary DNA samples from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes, we identified point mutations in 18 genes, including 2 (ETV6 and GNAS) that have not previously been reported to harbor mutations in such patients.
In spite of their similarities, the BCOR and BCORL1 proteins show a number of different features, including their capability to interact with BCL6, their expression levels in human tissues, and their localization within subnuclear structures (Table 1).
Erythrocytosis with a hemoglobin level >18.5 g/dL in men and >16.5 g/dL in women or a hemoglobin level >17 g/dL in men and >15 g/dL in women if representing a sustained increase of >=2 g/dL from baseline are consistent but not diagnostic for PV (Table 1).
A deficit of monocytes, B cells, and NK cells was detected, the T-cell count remained normal (Table 1 and supplemental Table 2).
The Akaike information criterion (AIC) was applied to compare quality of models.
Blood count and BM examination were normal.
Category 3: Based upon any level of evidence, there is major NCCN disagreement that the intervention is appropriate.
Considering the independent significance of driver mutations, we developed a prognostic model that includes JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status in addition to the IPSS variables.
No difference in clinical outcome was seen for ASXL1-mutated patients versus ASXL1 wild-type or taking different numbers of mutations into account.
For confirmation of the somatic nature of the mutations, exons containing mutations were tested in nonclonal control DNA.
The prognostic value was only demonstrated for PMF when an "unfavorable" cytogenetic profile (complex karyotype, +8 or abnormalities other than isolated +9, 13q-, or 20q-) predicted inferior survival not already accounted for by the International Prognostic Scoring System for PMF.
TET2 (ten-eleven translocation (TET) oncogene family member 2).
Among these mutations, it seems that AML patients under the age of 60 with DNMT3A mutations have improved overall survival when treated with high-dose anthracycline chemotherapy, whereas the other genetic subsets of patients mentioned here do not seem to benefit, on average, from dose-intensified induction therapy.
Various somatic mutations are involved in the pathogenesis of MDS.
cDNA PCR or DNA PCR assay with direct sequencing for RUNX1 mutation analysis.
Patients who require 2 cycles of chemotherapy to achieve a remission are likely to have more resistant disease and should be considered for a more intensive approach as initial consolidation whenever possible.
During the past decade, a number of gene mutations have been identified in MDS.
Sixty-two specimens of bone marrow and/or peripheral blood were obtained from patients diagnosed with AML at the Kaohsiung Medical College Hospital from 1992 through 1996.
In contrast, mutations in other genes can lead to unsplicing of distinct genes and thereby result in particular phenotypic features.
HpaII tiny fragment enrichment by ligation-mediated PCR assay (HELP assay).
Mechanistically, partial loss of DNMT3A activity is thought to lead to hypomethylation, but which methylated loci are altered and directly contribute to leukaemogenesis in DNMT3A-mutant or DNMT3A-haploinsufficient cells has not yet been delineated.
Actuarial survival curves were estimated by the method of Kaplan-Meier and compared by the log-rank test.
P-values <0.05 were considered significant.
The number of patient-years of exposure was 105 in the ruxolitinib group and 87 in the placebo group; study discontinuation and crossover to ruxolitinib accounted for lower exposure in the placebo group.
SUMMARY.
PCR was performed for 35 cycles, and then 5 muL of each of the amplicons were denatured in 2 muL denaturing solution (95% formamide, 10 mM EDTA, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 0.05% xylenecyanol) at 95--degrees--C for 5 min and thereafter directly placed on ice.
Five patients had frameshift mutations, one at RHD and four in the C-terminal part, all generating termination codons within the 3' -untranslated region.
The incidence of grade 3 or 4 toxicities after cycle 1 was higher in the high-dose arm than in the intermediate-dose arm (61% vs. 51%: P = .005), but the incidence of 30-day mortality was the same in both arms (10%).
Christiansen et al. found that RUNX1 mutations were significantly associated with monosomy 7 or 7q- in therapy-related MDS.
Although the loss of TET enzyme activity would be predicted to increase DNA cytosine methylation and reduce 5-hmC levels, studies of the effects of TET2 mutations on global levels of methylation and 5-hmC in primary patient materials have yielded conflicting results.
In the analyses of change from baseline to week 24, patients who discontinued the study drug or crossed over before week 24 were counted as not having a response (for response measures of a reduction in spleen volume and symptom improvement).
A total of 23.2% of patients who received ruxolitinib and 14.6% of patients who received placebo had bruising; all events were grade 1 or 2 except for one grade 3 event in the ruxolitinib group.
In contrast, genetic susceptibility to MDS and/or AML is infrequent.
The rate of therapy-related MDS/AML is higher among patients with certain primary tumors, including breast cancer, gynecologic cancers, and lymphomas (both nonHodgkin's lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma), largely owing to the more leukemogenic cytotoxic agents that are commonly used in the treatment of these tumors.
These combinatorial mutations suggest a requirement for different therapeutic approaches tailored to the molecular profile of individual patients.
GATA1 and GATA2 are related essential transcription factors that govern the development of multiple hematopoietic cells.
His elder brother (patient number 6165; P1, III, 2), 16 years of age, also had a history of chronic neutropenia with a chronic EBV replication in the gut and a severe respiratory distress syndrome requiring supplemental oxygen at age 14 linked to pulmonary bronchiectasis.
A sample report for a quantitative JAK2 V617F assay is presented as Table 5.
Low-dose radiation therapy (100-1000 cGy in 5-10 fractions) also is effective at temporarily resolving symptoms associated with nonsplenic sites of extramedullary hematopoiesis.
The FAB classification (1976) had set the threshold between high-grade MDS and AML at 30% blasts, whereas the WHO classification lowered the threshold for diagnosing AML to 20% or more blasts; this was based on the finding that the biologic behavior (and survival outcomes) of the FAB MDS subgroup of "refractory anemia with excess blasts in transformation (RAEB-T)" with 20% to 30% blasts was equally grim compared with that of patients with greater than 30% blasts.
The SF3B1 gene, which encodes subunit 1 of the splicing factor 3b complex, is located at the long arm of chromosome 2 at position 33.1 (2q33.1).
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal hematopoietic neoplasm characterized by peripheral cytopenia, bone marrow dyspoiesis with or without excess blasts, and >30% transformation rate to acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Frameshift mutations were validated by cloning and sequencing individual colonies (TOPO TA cloning; Invitrogen).
The median neutrophil count was 1.5 G/L (25th percentile: 1.2; 75th percentile: 2.0), although the count was mildly diminished, all patients experienced at least once a neutropenia between 0.5 and 1.2 G/L.
Although initial studies demonstrated that these mutants lead to reduced enzymatic function with respect to alpha-ketoglutarate production, the presence of focal, recurrent heterozygous mutations suggested these might lead to an aberrant gain-of-function.
They showed that GATA2 promotes megakaryopoiesis by driving progenitor cell proliferation and megakaryocytic lineage gene expression while suppressing myeloid gene expression.
This analysis indicates that evaluation of the mutation status of TP53, EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, and ASXL1 would add the most information to clinical prognostic scores as currently assessed in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
The CEBPA gene encodes for CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), a transcription factor that plays a key role in the differentiation of granulocytes.
Postinduction Therapy: Similar to younger patients, older patients who receive standard cytarabine/anthracycline induction are evaluated with a bone marrow evaluation 7 to 10 days after completion of chemotherapy and categorized according to the presence of blasts or hypoplasia.
In another study, TP53 mutations occurred in 20% of low-risk MDS patients with del(5q) at early disease stage, suggesting that these patients may be at a particularly increased risk of leukemic evolution.
Table 2. Spectrum of ASXL1 mutations in 179 patients with WHO-defined chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
We identified a total of 23 patients (5.9%) with somatic mutations in 1 of the cohesin genes. All gene mutations were mutually exclusive, and STAG1 (1.8%), STAG2 (1.3%), and SMC3 (1.3%) were most frequently mutated.
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION.
In contrast, TP53 mutations were observed mainly in patients with intermediate-2 or high risk according to the IPSS (79%) and were strongly associated with thrombocytopenia, an elevated blast proportion, and a complex karyotype.
In fact, 4 of 5 patients with truncation mutations also had the T618I point mutation, indicating that acquisition of both classes of mutations may be advantageous for tumor pathogenesis.
CGH analysis.
ONCOGENES.
Further, the putative candidates were prioritized based on population genotypic frequency.
In another study, ASXL1 knockouts had a predilection for developing MDS/MPN.
The present study also highlights the frequent early myeloid transformation in patients carrying a GATA2 mutation associated with a poor outcome linked to a refractory status of disease after initiation of chemotherapy.
5-hmC has been shown to block the binding of methyl-DNA-binding proteins that normally confer transcriptional silencing.
Ultimately, comparison of TKI-treated patients to historical controls will help determine whether these therapies impact disease endpoints such as leukemia-free progression and overall survival.
Screening The usual indications for JAK2 mutation testing include unexplained polycythemia, neutrophilia, or thrombocytosis (when secondary causes have been ruled out), because each may represent a MPN (Table 3).
Table 5. Sample Report for Quantitative JAK2 V617F Mutation Assay.
Among cases with an abnormal karyotype, trisomy 8 was more common in cohesin mutant patients (19% vs 9%; P = .004; supplemental Table 6), whereas 25/del(5q) and 27/del(7q) were less common (Table 1).
There, however, was no difference in the distribution of ASXL1 and spliceosome component mutations (Table 1).
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and related myeloid neoplasms are a heterogeneous group of myeloid neoplasms, which frequently terminate in acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
In 2007, additional mutations in exon 12 of JAK2 gene were found in a small percentage of PV patients.
The proximal first exon (IG exon) is utilized generally in various tissues.
Although none of the genetic abnormalities discussed earlier affect the initial course of AML treatment, they provide prognostic information that may influence subsequent treatment decisions.
n = 42 (mutants), 281 (WT).
Research into basic leukemia biology using banked samples from clinical trials may provide keys to altered cellular pathways, which may lead to new treatment options.
RNA splicing is initiated by the recognition of 50 splice site by a U1 snRNP complex, followed by the recruitment of a complex consisting of a U2AF35/65 heterodimer, ZRSR2 and an SR protein such as SRSF1 or 2, and other factors to recognize the 30 splice site.
We observed that mutations of RUNX1, TP53, and NRAS were each strongly associated with severe thrombocytopenia (P<0.001 for each gene) (Fig. 3A).
Survival ranges from approximately 2 to 11 years, depending on defined prognostic factors.
DNMT3A and DNA methylation.
NCCN, in keeping with its commitment to public transparency, publishes these disclosures for panel members, staff, and NCCN itself.
In contrast, FLT3-TKD may be associated with an additional favorable prognosis in the presence of NPM1 or CEBPA mutations.
When serial samples were analyzed, we found that an U2AF1 mutation detected at the sAML stage was present from initial MDS presentations, suggesting an ancestral origin of this mutation (supplemental Figure 5).
Data concerning the prognostic significance of DNMT3A mutations have thus far been conflicting.
AS, allele-specific; LNA, locked nucleic acid; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism.
In younger patients, strategies for consolidation are based on the potential risk of relapse, with higher-risk patients receiving more aggressive therapy.
Clinical phenotypes at diagnosis are reported in Table 1.
The changes in the total symptom score among patients with the JAK2V617F mutation were -52.6% (improvement) in the ruxolitinib group and 42.8% (worsening) in the placebo group, and the changes among those without the mutation were -28.1% and 37.2%, respectively (P = 0.11 for interaction).
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) screening for potential HSCT candidates is left to institutional policies regarding provision of CMV-negative blood products to patients who are CMV-negative at time of diagnosis.
The most frequent genetic abnormalities detected using a sensitive next-generation amplicon deep-sequencing method were found in TET2 with aberrations also seen in CBL, RUNX1 and RAS.
We studied 879 PMF patients to determine the individual and combinatorial prognostic relevance of somatic mutations.
Higher analytical sensitivity may be achieved by using clamped PCR, followed by nucleotide sequencing.
Finally, PRC2-mediated transcriptional repression has also recently been identified as an important pathogenic event in acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL).
[SIDEBAR TEXT].
In addition to the eight subjects with EZH2 point mutations, the EZH2 locus at 7q36.1 was entirely deleted at one allele in 22 subjects by 7 or 7q (micro)deletions.
Similar cytogenetic profiles in ET did not predominate in the older age group but were associated with palpable splenomegaly; concurrent tobacco use; venous thrombosis; and anemia, with a hemoglobin <10 g/dL.
Interestingly, some laboratories obtained positive results with all four specimens, whereas others obtained negative results with all four.
ABSTRACT.
The impact of the driver mutations on OS was independent of IPSS at diagnosis and of time-dependent DIPSS (maximum P value equal to .033).
Graubert et al has reported an increased risk of progression to secondary AML, while other studies reported no effect of U2AF1 mutations upon clinical outcome.  depletion of cohesin may increase RUNX1 expression, forming the basis of leukemogenesis in these patients.
The most common grade 3 or 4 nonhematologic adverse events (abdominal pain, fatigue, and dyspnea) occurred more frequently in the placebo group.
The GATA2 R396Q variation was not identified in the maternal grandparents' DNA, but the NEK11 D87Y variation was detected in the maternal grandfather's DNA sample.
Additional value is also suggested for EZH2, IDH1 and SRSF2 mutations.
M-C Kuo; D-C Liang; C-F Huang; Y-S Shih; J-H Wu; T-L Lin; L-Y Shih.
The PCR was performed on a DNA thermal cycler using a program consisting of 35 cycles at 95--degrees--C for 30 s, 58--degrees--C for 30 s and 68--degrees--C for 1 min, with an initial preheating at 94--degrees--C for 3 min and a final step for 5 min at 68--degrees--C.
Like JAK2 and MPL mutations, somatic mutations of CALR behave as driver mutations responsible for the myeloproliferative phenotype.
As low expression of these genes may have functionally equivalent consequences, we defined a subset of patients with altered expression of the cohesin complex in an additional 15% of patients.
Similarly, EZH2 mutations are associated with worsened overall survival in PMF (TABLE 1).
Mutations in epigenetic modifiers account for new classes of mutant disease alleles that contribute to the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies in addition to the classical class I genes that affect proliferation and class II genes that affect differentiation.
Statistical analysis of clinical data.
Although a close relationship between SF3B1 mutation and the presence of ring sideroblast subtype is well-established, how the SF3B1 mutation affects MDS clonal development or the formation of ring sideroblasts is still unclear.
HSCs in Evi1-/- embryos were markedly decreased in numbers, showing defective self-renewing proliferation and repopulating capacity.
More evidence for the important role of GATA2 in HSC arises from the finding that decreased expression of GATA2 might be responsible for the pathogenesis and development of the clinical features of aplastic anemia.
Figure 2. Change in Symptom Scores. Panel A shows the results of an intention-to-treat analysis of the proportion of patients with at least a 50% reduction in the total symptom score over time (each value plotted represents the moving average for the previous 7 days). Patients who discontinued the study drug or for whom data were missing were considered not to have had a response. The majority of responses occurred rapidly, within the first 4 weeks after treatment. Only patients with baseline data were included in this analysis. Panel B shows the percent change from baseline in the total symptom score at week 24 (in 129 patients in the ruxolitinib group and 103 patients in the placebo group) and at the last evaluation during receipt of the randomly assigned study drug (in 16 patients in the ruxolitinib group and 42 patients in the placebo group). Five patients with a baseline score of 0, 8 patients with missing baseline values, and 6 patients with insufficient data after baseline are not included. Whereas most patients who received ruxolitinib had a reduction in the total symptom score, the majority of patients who received placebo had a worsening of symptoms (worsening in the total symptom score of >=150% is shown as 150%). Panel C shows the mean percent change in the score for each symptom in the modified Myelofibrosis Symptom Assessment Form, version 2.0. All symptoms improved in the ruxolitinib group and worsened in the placebo group (P<0.01 for all comparisons with placebo). T bars denote standard errors.
The guidelines are intended to establish a helpful reference for laboratory professionals in the selection of methodologies, validation of procedures, and interpretation of results in JAK2 and MPL testing.
One recent study showed that coincidence of EZH2 and TET2 mutations occurred in 35% of patients with MDS/AML and also demonstrated that an EZH2 mutation augments the repopulating capacity of hematopoietic stem cells and causes myeloid proliferation.
Fig. 2. Schematic RNA Splicing. Adopted and modified according to Cazzola M et al. Blood 2013;121:260-269 and Yoshida K et al. Nature, 2011,478:64-69. (A) Human pre-mRNA consists of exon and intron sequences. During RNA splicing process, introns are removed and exons are retained and formed mature mRNA with normal sequences.The RNA splicing is performed in spliceosome where resides a macromolecular structure composed of 5'-snRNAs associated with proteins to form particles termed snRNPs.The outcomes of mutation vary according to mutated sites and components, which could lead to retention of intron(s), truncation or missing of exon(s), as well as increased or decreased pre-mRNA level. (B) There are 2 classes of introns: the majority is U2 type and the rare is U12 type, which will be catalyzed by 2 different spliceosomes, U2- orU12-dependent spliceosomes. The key signal sequences are located the donor site (DS) (arrow points to 5'end of the intron), the branch site (BS) (arrow points to near the 3'end), and the splice acceptor site (AS) (arrow points to 3'end). In the major U2-dependent spliceosome, the 5'donor site is recognized by the U1 snRNP, whereas the branch site is recognized by the U2 snRNP. RNA splicing is complicated and requires many components. It begins with the recruitment of U1 snRNP to the 5'SS. Two U2 auxiliary factors are needed to bind different sites. The large one, U2A65, along with SF1, binds the branch point sequence (BPS) and its downstream polypyrimidine tract while the smaller subunit, U2AF35, binds to the AG dinucleotide of the 3'SS, interacting with both U2AF65 and a SR protein, such as SRSF2. ZRSR2 is also required for RNA splicingby interacting with U2AF and SRSF2 proteins. After the recognition of the 3'SS, U2 snRNP, together with SF3A1 and SF3B1, is recruited to the 3'SS to generate the splicing complex. Mutation of U2AF, SRSF2, SF3B1 or ZESR2 involving in RNA splicing results in abnormal mRNA pattern e.g., intron retention, truncation of exon due to cryptic splice site or missing exon. Pre-mRNA level can be either increased or decreased. Note: I = intron, E (1, 2, 3) = exon 1, 2, 3; snRNps = small nuclear ribonucleoproteins.
The role of TET2 in the classification of MPN is limited because TET2 mutations have been identified in most other myeloid malignancies.
Herein, we discuss the potential impact of these findings for the classification and treatment of these disorders.
Of special interest in our study was EZH2, that localizes to chromosome 7q36, proposed to function as an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene in different diseases.
The increasing use of next-generation sequencing technologies applied to the study of cancer genomes is making a remarkable contribution to our knowledge of the molecular landscape of CN-AML.
This technique was chosen for its high-throughput detection of recurrent oncogene mutations limited to well-characterized locations.
One patient displayed four mutations (ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2 and IDH2) and four patients displayed three mutations (two displayed ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 and two others displayed ASXL1, SRSF2 and IDH1 mutations).
For patients younger than 60 years who have experienced a relapse, enrollment in clinical trials is considered an appropriate strategy and is a strongly preferred option by the panel.
IDENTIFICATION OF NEW SOMATIC MUTATIONS.
In order to examine prognostic relevance of mutations detected at the time of initial diagnosis and further validate their value when encountered at time of tertiary center referral, we used two independent patient cohorts.
The larger form is a protein of 480 amino acids (50.5 kDa); the shorter form, encoded by the transcript variant of 3263 base pairs, has 466 amino acids and presents a smaller exon 5 (49.1 kDa).
She developed a disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex infection and later an AML M4 subtype.
Table 1. JAK2 Mutations in Myeloproliferative Neoplasms.
Molecular profiling of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia reveals diverse mutations in >80% of patients with TET2 and EZH2 being of high prognostic relevance.
Patients and experimental samples.
Approximately 45% of patients will be JAK2V617 negative and alternative diagnoses that may mimic ET should be considered, including CML, prefibrotic PMF, and PV.
Many of the newer treatment strategies are designed to work more gradually using agents that may allow expression of tumor suppressor genes (eg, a methyltransferase inhibitor such as decitabine or 5-azacytidine) or increase apoptosis (eg, histone deacetylase inhibitors).
However, we also noted reduced expression of cohesin genes in patients without mutations, including 15% of lower- and higher-risk MDS patients with reduced expression of STAG2 and RAD21.
The results can be better clarified by incorporating a disclaimer in the exon 12 test report: This test does not include testing for the more common JAK2 V617F (exon 14, c.1849G>T) mutation.
Splice site mutations can cause activation of a nearby cryptic splice site (upstream or downstream of the normal site), omission of the whole exon, or intron retention, any of which can lead to frameshifts and premature stop codons that will trigger nonsense-mediated decay and haploinsufficiency.
We found that C-terminal mutations were associated with a significantly higher risk of AML transformation compared with those without mutations.
The former had a lower AIC value (1744.5 vs 1764.3), indicating a better quality for the given set of data.
It is known that GATA factors interact with simple DNA motifs (WGATAR) to regulate critical processes, including hematopoiesis.
TET2 and DNA hydroxymethylation.
Statistical analysis.
Results were analyzed with CNAG (Version 3.0) or Genotyping Console (Affymetrix).
Recently, a putative tumor suppressor gene, PTEN/MMAC1, has been identified at chromosome 10q23.3.
A high allele burden in PV and ET is associated with progression to myelofibrosis.
The mutational status of RUNX1 was also correlated with the clinicohematological characteristics in our patients with CMML at initial diagnosis.
Unexpectedly, S34F U2AF35 mutant-transduced HeLa cells showed severely suppressed cell growth rather than enhanced cell proliferation, accompanied by apoptosis and G2/M arrest.
Jerald Z. Gong; James R. Cook; Timothy C. Greiner; Cyrus Hedvat; Charles E. Hill; Megan S. Lim; Janina A. Longtine; Daniel Sabath; Y. Lynn Wang.
For the false-negative, false-positive, and no-consensus results, there appeared to be no correlation between the discordant results and assay methodology.
Chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) is a rare myeloproliferative neoplasm, with only ~200 patients reported to date, mostly culled from case reports and small case series.
Thus, identification of new molecular factors involved in these malignancies would be fundamental to improve HSC-based anti-leukemic therapies and to prevent leukemia progression.
The median time to AML transformation in patients with RUNX1 mutations was 23.3 months compared with 28.3 months for those without RUNX1 mutations (P = 0.175, Figure 2b).
The amplicons were purified using a gel extraction kit (Geneclean III Kit, Bio101, Inc., Vista, CA) and then sequenced using SequiTherm EXCEL II DNA Sequencing Kit (Epientre Technologies, Madison, WI). The sequencing primers were the same as those used for the PCR-SSCP.
RUNX1 mutation-positive patients were younger and had a higher BM blast percentage than did mutation-negative patients, but the difference did not reach statistical significance.
Four patients, which concomitantly harbored an EZH2 and TET2 mutation, were added into the EZH2-mutated group, as EZH2 mutations are believed to be an early event in the disease process and precede the sequential acquisition of TET2 mutations and because EZH2 mutations remained significant in the multivariate analyses in contrast to TET2 (Supplementary Information 2).
Patient-designated intermediate-1 risk but who are transfusion dependent or have an unfavorable karyotype are managed as high risk (Table 6).
Yildrim et al found that the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NURD) complex member methyl-CpG binding domain protein 3 (MBD3) specifically recognizes 5-hmC in embryonic stem cells and represses the transcription of genes marked by 5-hmC.
Similarly, for patients younger than 50 years who received high-dose cytarabine at the 3-g/m2 dose schedule for consolidation, the rates of treatment-related deaths (4% vs. 0%) and grade 3 or greater neurologic toxicity (16% vs. 0%) were higher than for those who received the standard dose.
Epigenetic modifiers provide new targets for therapeutic intervention.
A heterozygous nonsense GATA2 R330X mutation (c.988C > T, supplemental Figure 1) was identified.
These are observations in highly artificial systems; no information about abnormal splicing is available for other splicing factor mutants.
Ethnic differences among cohorts might also be a reason for the distinct frequency of RUNX1 mutations between ours and earlier studies.
In a large SWOG study, patients younger than 65 years (N = 665) were randomized to receive high-dose cytarabine (2 g/m2 every 12 hours x 6 days for a total of 24 g/m2; patients aged < 50 years were initially randomized to receive 3 g/m2 at the above schedule before the high-dose arm was redefined to 2 g/m2 because of toxicity concerns) or standard-dose cytarabine (200 mg/m2/d x 7 days); patients in both treatment arms also received daunorubicin (45 mg/m2/d x 3 days).
The youngest brother (patient number 6224; P1, III, 5), 5 years of age, presented with recurrent fever and chronic EBV replication in the blood.
The durability of spleen response and survival were analyzed with the use of the Kaplan- Meier method.
The median, lower, and upper interquartile values depict the distribution of quantitative variables.
To determine the coverage of genomic intervals, the data were processed with BEDTools and analyzed in R.
Blood and medullar tests were normal except for a mild B-cell deficiency.
Karyotype risk designation and CMML risk stratification were according to the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system, the MDAPS and the G-MDAPS, respectively.
Alternatively, because DNMT3A functions as an oligomer, AML-associated mutations may result in dominant-negative inhibition of the wild-type enzyme.
NuRD proteins can be detected not only at repressed genes but also at most genes activated by GATA1.
Quantitative tests for JAK2 V617F allele have been used to determine the depth of clinical remission and to guide adoptive immunotherapy, such as donor lymphocyte infusion.
Clinical effect of driver mutations of JAK2, CALR, or MPL in primary myelofibrosis.
ASXL1 has few well-characterized domains, but it does have a conserved carboxyl-terminal PHD domain and a putative DNA-binding domain and is not thought to possess enzymatic activity.
The median follow-up of the study population was 3.5 years (range, 0.1-30.8 years).
Adverse effects of splenectomy in patients with PMF include bleeding, thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, increased circulating blasts, and hepatomegaly.
Of these, ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations inter-independently predicted shortened survival.
The adjusted VAF of STAG2, RAD21, and SMC3 mutations were significantly lower than those for other concomitantly present TET2 gene mutations (P = .01).
In patients for whom the cause of neutrophilia is not easily discernible, the incorporation of CSF3R mutation testing can be a useful point-of-care diagnostic to evaluate for the presence of a clonal myeloid disorder, as well as the potential for genetically informed therapy (Figure 2).
Thus, high GATA2 levels would silence FOG1 expression in maturing mast cells, leading to enhanced GATA2 expression and further FOG1 repression.
Of patients with splanchnic vein thrombosis, 31% were found to have associated JAK2 mutations and often had a latent MPN, with the most common site of thrombosis occurring in the portal venous system.
In all analyses, P-values were two-tailed and values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
GATA2 expression has a broad distribution among hematopoietic cells, with a particularly prominent expression in early progenitors, as well as in megakaryocytes and in mast cell lineages.
At present, the only treatment modality with curative potential is allogeneic stem cell transplantation, but this particular treatment is still associated with a high rate of mortality and morbidity.
Prognostically significant somatic mutations occurred in patients in all risk groups.
One approach to the integration of mutational-analysis results into the IPSS would be to include a variable for mutations in one or more of these five prognostic genes (Fig. 4).
The Spanish cytogenetic risk stratification system analyzed the role of karyotype in patients with CMML.
However, no evidence shows that dysplasia represents an independent risk factor, because it is frequently linked to poor-risk cytogenetics.
On the contrary, PMF with nonmutated JAK2, CALR, or MPL has a poor prognosis with a particularly high risk of leukemic transformation, as shown by a study of the Mayo Clinic and by the present work.
Furthermore, GATA2 gene expression is determined by multiple cis-regulatory elements spread over a wide range of the mouse genome.
These data suggest that therapeutic targeting of the EGLN family may also demonstrate efficacy in the treatment of IDH-mutant disease.
Functional analyses demonstrated that this single mutation was sufficient to reduce FOG1 binding to GATA1 and to inhibit the ability of GATA1 to rescue erythroid differentiation in the G1E murine cell line.
Mutations of GATA2 described previously are highly heterogeneous (supplemental Table 3), ranging from the creation of a stop codon (R337X), a frameshift mutation scattered over the whole coding frame (R78, G81, L105, A194, G200, D259, N317, L332 and A341), deletions (ranging from large deletions encompassing the whole GATA2 locus to smaller deletions such as codons 1-290, codons 340-381, codons 341-346, and codons 362-365 or T355), and point mutations (located close to the second zinc finger domain with the exception of P254L: P304H, C319SC, T344M, T354M, L359V, R361L, R362Q, N371K, C373R, R396W, R396Q, and R398W).
A claim of intellectual property rights has been made for the list of mutated genes with independent prognostic significance identified in this analysis.
As shown recently by us and by others, the clinical course of MPNs is profoundly influenced not only by the founding driver mutations but also by subclonal events.
Hematologic abnormalities are based on laboratory values. The data shown are for events of the worst grade during the study, regardless of whether this grade was a change from the baseline grade.
Highly sensitive qPCR for JAK2 V617F may have value in followup of patients with primary and secondary myelofibrosis after allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
MDS is one of the most frequent hematopoietic malignancies, particularly in the elderly.
We also found that C-terminal mutations of RUNX1 in CMML predicted an increased risk and shorter time to AML transformation.
These studies show that monosomal karyotype, independent of other unfavorable cytogenetic factors, confers very poor prognosis in both young and older patients with AML.
Total genomic DNA was isolated and extracted from bone marrow or peripheral blood leukocyte of the subjects as described previously.
We have already examined the unique switching profile that the expression profile of GATA1 and GATA2 shows during erythroid differentiation (Fig. 2).
Most improvements in recent years have been in the treatment of patients with APL, which serves as a paradigm for understanding how the biology of the disease can inform treatment.
Truncated CSF3R may lack the di-leucine internalization motif, resulting in an increase in cell surface expression of the receptor.
The somatic deletions and mutations of PTEN/MMAC1 gene were identified in several cancer cell lines and primary cancers including glioma, breast, endometrium, prostate, thyroid, and malignant melanoma.
We report here that EZH2, located at 7q36.1, is frequently targeted in MDS. Analysis of EZH2 deletions, missense and frameshift mutations strongly suggests that EZH2 is a tumor suppressor.
ASXL1 belongs to the enhancer of trithorax and polycomb gene family and is mutated in 33% of CMML.
cDNA was fragmented with Covaris, profiled with Agilent Bioanalyzer, and subjected to Illumina library preparation with NEBNext reagents (New England Biolabs).
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital.
A recent large-scale study of ETV6 rearrangements in myeloid malignancies identified a low frequency of occurrence (0.5%, 51 of 9550 patients), comprising 1.1% of AML (40 of 3798) and 0.2% of MDS (6 of 3375) patients.
It has already been suggested that NPM1 is an early event in leukemogenesis.
Another mechanism of GATA2 action seems to be the activation of SCL after GATA2 binding to its promoter, controlling progenitor cell survival in primitive hematopoiesis.
All the patients with PV no longer required phlebotomy after treatment, but only 13% of patients with ET had a reduction of platelets to <400 x 109/L.
From a total of 23 putative mutations in cohesin genes, the somatic status could be confirmed in 16 by analyzing remission samples or T-cells (CD3+ CD11b- CD14- CD3+), which were purified from diagnostic samples by flow cytometry (supplemental Tables 2-6).
Of note, for the most frequently mutated genes, that is, EZH2, ASXL1, TET2, RAS and CBL various pairwise analyses were performed between wild-type/wild-type, mutated/wild-type, wild-type/mutated and mutated/mutated combinations.
The primers for all exons of the cohesin genes are listed in supplemental Table 1, available on the Blood Web site.
These data suggest the possibility that loss-of-function cohesin mutations alter transcriptional orchestration of differentiation/proliferation and may have a role in clonal evolution and tumorigenesis.
Several informative clinical prognostic tools exist for the risk stratification of MDS, but it has become apparent that incorporation of genetic mutations may further enhance the efficacy of current clinical tools.
The NCCN AML Panel convenes annually to update recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of AML in adults.
Associations between gene mutations are represented by a Circos diagram (Figure 1).
It should also be noted that future trials might involve treatments conceived for specific genetic subgroups.
RESULTS.
They owe their name to their ability to bind the consensus DNA sequence (A/T)GATA(A/G) through two highly conserved zinc finger (ZnF) domains.
Genotyping of 953 mutations representing 111 genes was performed on amplified DNA with the use of iPlex extension-chemistry methods (Sequenom) and mass spectrometry, as previously described for the complete set of OncoMap assays.
Cumulative risk of thrombosis according to JAK2, CALR, and MPL mutation status.
In a review of data from adult patients treated on a phase III SWOG/ECOG intergroup study (N = 609), the 5-year survival rates for those with favorable, intermediate-risk, and unfavorable cytogenetics were 55%, 38%, and 11%, respectively.
Gorica Nikoloski; Saskia M C Langemeijer; Roland P Kuiper; Ruth Knops; Marion Massop; Evelyn R L T M Tonnissen; Adrian van der Heijden; Theresia N Scheele; Peter Vandenberghe; Theo de Witte; Bert A van der Reijden; Joop H Jansen.
Notably, mutations in EZH2 were associated with impaired survival in MDS but not with an increased risk of transformation to AML; these data suggest a differential role for PRC2 function in acute and chronic myeloid malignancies, which is supported by the current absence of reported EZH2 mutations in de novo AML.
Therefore, these molecular markers have not been incorporated into the risk categorization schema in the current guidelines.
Figure 1. Leukaemia-associated mutations in the DNA methylation and demethylation pathway. The process of DNA methylation and the enzymes involved are shown. Enzymes known to be affected by somatic mutations in myeloid leukaemia are marked with an asterisk. The catalytic domain of the TET family of methylcytosine dioxygenases is contained within the conserved carboxyl-terminal region. TET1 and TET3 each contain an amino-terminal CxxC zinc-finger domain that is probably responsible for DNA binding; by contrast, TET2 does not possess a CxxC domain, consistent with a likely requirement for other proteins to direct TET2 localization within the genome. There are splice variants of TET2 that do not contain the carboxyl-terminal catalytic domain; the function of these variants, which are abundantly expressed in haematopoietic cells, are not yet understood. Although it is not yet clear whether 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) is consistently associated with activation and/or repression of transcription, 5-hmC has been shown to specifically recruit at least one protein-binding complex subunit - the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NURD) complex member methyl-CpG binding domain protein 3 (MBD3) - to repress the transcription of genes marked by 5-hmC. Currently 5-carboxylcytosine, 5-formylcytosine, and 5-hydroxymethyluracil are only known to be by-products of 5-hmC in DNA demethylation, but no specific functions have been described. 2-HG, 2-hydroxyglutarate; alpha-KG, alpha-ketoglutarate; AID, activation-induced cytidine deaminase; BER, base-excision repair; DNMT3A, DNA methyltransferase 3A; IDH, isocitrate dehydrogenase; NADP+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; SAH, S-adenosylhomocysteine; SAM, S-adenosylmethionine; TDG, thymine DNA glycosylase.
First, overall JAK2 V617F mutation testing was reproducible among the laboratories performing this testing.
Thus, NPM1 mutation confers favorable prognosis only in the absence of FLT3-ITD.
RESULTS.
Methods.
Although mutations of R140 in IDH2 exclusively result in the substitution of arginine to glutamine (IDH2-R140Q), mutations affecting IDH1-R132 or IDH2-R172 consist of a broader range of amino-acid substitutions (IDH1-R132H, IDH1-R132C, IDH2-R172K, IDH2-R172M and IDH2-R172S).
She had additional infections such as pulmonary aspergillosis, recurrent oral herpes, and onychomycosis infections.
In this international collaborative project, we studied two independent cohorts of patients with PMF in order to clarify the prognostic relevance of newly described mutations, including TET2, CBL, IDH1 or IDH2, ASXL1, EZH2, DNMT3A and SRSF2.
The cohesin complex includes SMC1, SMC3, SCC1/RAD21, SCC3/STAG, WPL1, and PDS5B.
The new genetics of chronic neutrophilic leukemia and atypical CML: implications for diagnosis and treatment.
This indicates that deregulation of EZH2 in cancer may not be generalized into one simple mechanism.
Patients were randomized to treatment with an "intermediate-dose" cytarabine regimen (cycle 1: cytarabine, 200 mg/m2 x 7 days + idarubicin, 12 mg/m2 x 3 days; cycle 2: cytarabine, 1 g/m2 every 12 hours x 6 days + amsacrine, 120 mg/m2 x 3 days) [12 g/m2 cytarabine] or a "high-dose" cytarabine regimen (cycle 1: cytarabine, 1 g/m2 every 12 hours x 5 days + idarubicin, 12 mg/m2 x 3 days; cycle 2: cytarabine, 2 g/m2 every 12 hours x 4 days + amsacrine, 120 mg/m2 x 3 days) [26 g/m2 cytarabine].
Figure 5. Proposed updated model of myeloid malignancy pathogenesis based on mutational data from patient samples. The myeloid malignancies have previously been thought to be induced by mutations in genes that normally promote increased growth or enhance survival (so-called class I genetic alterations) in concert with co-occurring mutations in genes that are normally involved in haematopoietic differentiation (so-called class II genetic alterations). Mutations in class I genes consist of activating mutations in genes such as FMS-related tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3), NRAS, KRAS and KIT. These class I alterations are rarely co-occurring, which is consistent with their overlapping function in myeloid malignancy transformation. This is visually depicted using primary data from patients with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) in the form of a Circos diagram. Recently, a series of mutually exclusive mutations that affect DNA hydroxymethylation have been found in patients with myeloid malignancies; these include tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) or IDH2 mutations, and potentially other heretofore unidentified disease alleles. Class II mutations occur in genes that are involved in regulating the chromatin state (such as mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL) and additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1)) or DNA methylation (such as DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A)); again, these mutations rarely co-occur, which is consistent with redundant roles in oncogenic transformation. Moreover, functional data of several genes in this new class of epigenetic modifier mutation have been found to affect both cellular proliferation as well as cellular differentiation (for example, translocations in MLL as well as loss-of-function mutations in TET2). On this basis, a revised model of myeloid malignancy pathogenesis is depicted here, in which mutations in class I, class II and in two novel classes of epigenetic modifier genes co-occur to promote myeloid transformation. CBF, CCAAT-binding factor; CEBPA, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha; NPM1, nucleophosmin; RUNX1, runt-related transcription factor 1.
Clinical outcome in the total cohort of AML patients according to cohesin gene mutation status.
The spectrum of gene mutations in MDS and related myeloid neoplasms includes mutations involving classical signaling molecules, such as NRAS/KRAS, PTNP11, NF1, c-CBL, JAK2, and FLT3, and those involving hematopoietic transcription factors, such as RUNX1, ETV6, and CEBPA, together with TP53 and other tumor suppressor genes.
Ninety patients (40%) had SRSF2 mutations, 13 (6%) had SF3B1 mutations and 20 (9%) had U2AF35 mutations.
On a multivariable analysis, independent prognostic factors included older age, poor performance status, thrombocytopenia, anemia, increased BM blasts, leukocytosis (>20 x 109/l), chromosome 7 or complex cytogenetic abnormalities and a prior history of red blood cell transfusions.
All of these patterns were found in our AML patients. Sequencing of the normal-sized RT-PCR products amplified from the AML specimens, cell lines, and normal controls showed wild-type PTEN/MMAC1 transcripts except in the U937 line (4-base insertion) (data not shown).
Moreover, ASXL1 directly interacts with the PRC2 complex in reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation experiments.
In the present study, we identified GATA2 mutations as a cause of congenital mild neutropenia associated with a high risk of leukemic transformation.
In particular, 11/21 alterations were observed in this CMML cohort.
Monocytosis is frequently associated with neutropenia.
The new risk stratification incorporating molecular data along with cytogenetics is summarized in the guidelines (see "Risk Status Based on Cytogenetics and Molecular Abnormalities," on page 995).
Single-fraction irradiation (100 cGy) of the lungs may be effective for pulmonary hypertension and 400 cGy for extremity pain associated with PMF.
In striking contrast, the SCL complex was depleted at sites where GATA1 functions as a repressor.
Mutations of two or more genes were present in 79 samples (18.0%) (Fig. 1, and Table 6 in the Supplementary Appendix).
In contrast, most patients who received placebo had progressive splenomegaly and worsening of myelofibrosis-related symptoms.
SRSF2 mutations were reported to be associated with poor prognosis in univariate analysis, but may not be an independent prognostic predictor.
The MonoMAC syndrome is characterized by a severe deficiency of monocytes, B-lymphocytes, and natural killer (NK) cells, along with nontuberculous mycobacterial, fungal, and viral infections and an autosomal-dominant transmission in most cases.
Cenersen, an antisense oligonucleotide complementary to TP53, suppresses mutant p53 expression and restores impaired erythropoiesis in patients with del(5q) MDS.
Importantly, cohesin genes can also affect transcription independently of CCCTC-binding factor.
Somatic mutations of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene have been identified in a number of cancer cell lines and primary cancers, and most frequently found in advanced cancers.
Accordingly, whereas the outcome of patients with IPSS/DIPSS-plus high-risk disease may not be affected by the presence of ASXL1 mutations, the apparently lower-risk patients might not fare as well as expected, an observation that might affect therapeutic decisions.
The authors compared the results of RIC allogeneic HSCT with those from matched subjects receiving conventional-dose chemotherapy.
Interestingly, cohesin genes have been found to bind to CCCTC-binding factor, a sequence-specific transcription factor that is known to interact with NPM1 in addition to regulating tumor suppressor loci.
Matched unrelated BM transplantation was performed and was complicated by a grade 4 cutaneous GVHD requiring intensive immunosuppressive therapy.
The overall survival of patients with RUNX1 mutations did not differ from those without mutations (median 15.7 months vs 12.8 months, P = 0.928, Figure 2a).
Recurrent mutations in SETBP1 were recently identified in 25% of aCML patients.
On the opposite, triple-negative patients were older, had lower hemoglobin level, lower platelet count, and higher IPSS risk (P values in Table 1).
Abbreviations: AVWS = acute von Willebrand syndrome; Hct = hematocrit; PV = polycythemia vera.
First, whole exome assembly was nonredundantly mapped with the reference genome hg19.
2-HG is present at markedly elevated levels in the serum of patients with AML harbouring IDH1 or IDH2 mutations, suggesting that 2-HG could be a biomarker for IDH-mutant AML.
The recent shortages of several chemotherapy agents have raised the question of how best to use cytarabine.
Although some studies showed no prognostic effect of IDH1 mutations on OS when considering all IDH mutations (IDH1 and IDH2 combined) or in the overall patient population, IDH1 mutations seemed to be associated with significantly worse outcomes in the subgroup of patients with NK-AML with favorable- or intermediate-risk disease.
Subsequent analysis has confirmed this finding, showing an overall frequency of ASXL1 mutation ranging from 14.4% to 20.7% of MDS.
After interruption of ruxolitinib therapy, myelofibrosis-related symptoms gradually returned to baseline levels.
One-hundred and twenty-three (54%) patients had at least one of the three spliceosome mutations.
All of these parameters were available for 780 patients in this cohort after excluding 200 pAML TCGA cases and 80 patients with incomplete clinical details.
Other.
However, their effects on RNA splicing have been evaluated only in a very limited context.
Next, the analytic algorithm within DNAnexus called all the positions that vary from a reference genome.
Patients.
ABSTRACT.
Elisa Rumi, Daniela Pietra, Cristiana Pascutto, Paola Guglielmelli, Alejandra Martinez-Trillos, Ilaria Casetti; Dolors Colomer; Lisa Pieri; Marta Pratcorona; Giada Rotunno; Emanuela Sant'Antonio; Marta Bellini; Chiara Cavalloni; Carmela Mannarelli; Chiara Milanesi; Emanuela Boveri; Virginia Ferretti; Cesare Astori; Vittorio Rosti; Francisco Cervantes; Giovanni Barosi; Alessandro M. Vannucchi; Mario Cazzola; on behalf of the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro Gruppo Italiano Malattie Mieloproliferative Investigators.
AML patients were classified according to French-American-British criteria as follows: M1, ten patients; M2, fourteen; M3, fifteen; M4, eleven; M5, eight; M6, four patients.
This error can be easily avoided by restricting exon 12 testing only to a reflex test.
The contamination was confirmed by flow cytometric analysis after magnetic bead sorting.
Identification of the underlying genetic aberrations in MDS may promote proper classification and prognostication of disease and, eventually, the development of targeted therapy.
8.1. GATA2 MUTATIONS IN CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA.
Also, patients with low 5-hmC levels showed hypomethylation relative to controls at the majority of differentially methylated CpG sites.
The ETV6 mutation appears also to be associated with adverse clinical outcomes in patients with MDS (hazard ratio = 2.04; 95% CI: 1.08-3.86).
ABSTRACT.
The results showed aberrant PTEN/MMAC1 transcripts in 15 of the 62 (24%) AML patients, 4 of the 5 cell lines (80%), and 4 of the 30 (13%) normal controls.
In a CALGB trial, the subgroup of patients aged 60 years or younger (n = 156) who received standard-dose cytarabine-daunorubicin induction therapy and 4 courses of high-dose cytarabine consolidation (3 g/m2 every 12 hours on days 1, 3, and 5, per course) experienced a 4-year DFS rate of 44%.
In a second example, one assay reported a specimen positive for JAK2 V617F that was reported negative in all other laboratories; however, that specimen was found to have a JAK2 exon 12 mutation, which is mutually exclusive with the V617F mutation.
As our study shows, somatic mutations in several genes are associated with distinct effects on cytopenias, blast proportion, the likelihood of co-occurrence with other molecular lesions, and overall survival.
Initially, we performed whole exome sequencing of 15 index cases with various forms of myeloid malignancies and identified distinct somatic mutations in genes encoding components of the spliceosomal machinery (supplemental Table 1, available on the Blood Web site; see the Supplemental Materials link at the top of the online article).
Study eligibility criteria included availability of PB smear, BM histology and cytogenetic information at the time of referral to the Mayo Clinic.
Table 1. Biologic and clinical presentations of patients with GATA2 mutations.
However, in another recent study, IDH2 mutation (restricted to IDH2-R140) was associated with improved survival among the overall study population, and among the subgroup of patients with favorable risk (intermediate-risk AML with NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD).
Less prominently, SRSF2 mutations were more frequently found in CMML (30.7-47 %) than in other subtypes of myeloid neoplasms.
Figure 3.  Proportions of Patients with Mutations, According to Platelet Count, Blast Percentage, and Hemoglobin Level.  Data are shown for the platelet count (Panel A), percentage of blasts in bone marrow aspirate (Panel B), and hemoglobin level (Panel C) at the time of bone marrow sample collection.  The numbers in parentheses along the x axis indicate the number of patients with a mutation in the gene (patients could have >1 mutated gene).  Mutations in NRAS, TP53, and RUNX1 were significantly associated with severe thrombocytopenia (defined as <50,000 platelets per cubic millimeter) (P<0.001 for each comparison) (Panel A) and elevated blast percentage (defined as >=5%) (P<0.001, P = 0.005, and P = 0.003 for mutations in the three genes, respectively) (Panel B).
They investigated the role and target genes of EVI1 in hematopoiesis using Evi1-/- mice, which died at embryonic day 10.5.
With the exception of GATA5, null mutations for each of the GATA genes results in embryonic lethality in mice, showing they are crucial transcriptional regulators in cell development.
The emerging realization of the molecular diversity of MDS parallels the clinical and phenotypic heterogeneity of this disease.
Regulators of DNA methylation (such as TET2, IDH1, IDH2 and DNMT3A) and of histone modifications (such as MLL translocations, ASXL1 and EZH2) are targeted by somatic alterations in a significant subset of patients with myeloid malignancies.
Serial samples were obtained for 38 patients.
Of note, no case revealed the Tyr641 mutation as described in follicular and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas of germinal center origin suggesting a different oncogenic mechanism in these diseases.
Among the 3 older patients, 2 had presented severe vascular complications, 1 with a lethal aortic dissection at the age of 36 (patient number 7107) and 1 cardiac infarct at the age of 50 in a woman without risk factors (patient number 5593).
The G-MDAPS was developed for patients with de novo MDS, secondary MDS and CMML and identified older age, poor performance status, thrombocytopenia, anemia, increased BM blasts, leukocytosis, chromosome 7 or complex cytogenetic abnormalities and transfusion dependence as independent factors associated with a shorter OS.
The basis for phenotypic differences between CSF3R mutation-positive CNL and aCML may relate to multiple factors.
Patients without JAK2 (V617F) were evaluated for MPL exon 10 mutations using a high-resolution melt assay or Sanger sequencing.
Interestingly, they also found high GATA2 occupancy and relatively low GATA1 at one of the cis-regulatory elements that controls FOG1 expression, which is normally occupied by GATA1 in erythroid cells.
Clinical presentation and disease course.
Besides these somatic mutations in the cohesin complex, in our analysis, we also identified 3 unannotated SNPs (supplemental Table 7).
Patients who underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation were censored at the time of transplant.
It is also possible that the phenotypic features are related to the transcriptional spectrum of cells in which the mutations occur.
It has been reported that ectopic expression of GATA2 promotes erythroblast proliferation while it blocks erythroid terminal differentiation.
Allogeneic transplantation may result in favorable long-term outcomes in selected patients, particularly when undertaken in the chronic phase of disease.
In 2005, several groups simultaneously described a point mutation in codon 617 of the protein tyrosine kinase gene Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) in BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN).
A phase I/II study that investigated TG101348 in 59 patients with PMF or post-PV/ET MF reported that 67% of patients achieved resolution of leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and constitutional symptoms, and decreased splenomegaly, whereas 44% achieved >50% reduction in JAK2V617F allelic burden.
All patients provided written informed consent.
Moreover, molecular defects have the potential to serve as biomarkers and probably are more suitable for the identification of therapy targets and responsiveness/refractoriness to treatment.
Seventy-four of 617 patients (12%) progressed to blast phase (leukemic transformation), including 43 of 399 subjects (11%) with JAK2 mutation, 17 of 140 (12%) with CALR mutation, 3 of 25 (12%) with MPL mutation, and 11 of 53 triple-negative subjects (21%).
The cytogenetic risk categories adopted by these guidelines are primarily based on analyses of large datasets from major cooperative group trials (see "Risk Status Based on Cytogenetics and Molecular Abnormalities," page 995).
The mutations have been found to be related to RNA slicing, transcription regulation, DNA methylation, histone modification, DNA repair/tumor suppressor, signal transduction, and the cohesion complex.
Cytogenetic assessment was done in 54 of 62 cases, none had a chromosome 10 or 10q deletion.
Two patients had transformation to acute myeloid leukemia; both were in the ruxolitinib group.
To get a better understanding of when mutations in the cohesin complex occur during clonal evolution, we evaluated the allelic burden of mutations in the cohesin complex.
In fact, FOG1-deficient mice display erythropoietic defects that largely mimic those found in Gata1-null mice.
For patients with NKAML, the remission rates are 40% to 50% with cytarabine combined with idarubicin, daunorubicin or mitoxantrone.
The United Kingdom National Cancer Research Institute AML 14 trial randomized 217 older patients (primarily age > 60 years; de novo AML, n = 129; secondary AML, n = 58; high-risk MDS, n = 30) unfit for chemotherapy to receive either low-dose cytarabine subcutaneously (20 mg twice daily for 10 consecutive days, every 4-6 weeks) or hydroxyurea (given to maintain target WBC counts < 10,000/mcL).
Given the diversity of known MPL mutations, the precise mutation detected should be reported using HGVS-standard nucleotide and amino acid nomenclature.
KEY POINTS.
Patients with any cohesin complex mutation had lower BAALC expression levels.
However, we had examined a large number of Chinese patients with de novo AML and had found that RUNX1 mutations, except for AML-M0 subtype, were rarely present (data not shown).
GATA1 is the founding member of the GATA family.
Splicing factor mutations in myelodysplasia.
DISCUSSION.
A total of 51% of all patients had at least one point mutation, including 52% of the patients with normal cytogenetics.
Overall, in our cohort of 81 cases, only 15 (18.5%) remained in which no mutation was detectable.
Genomic DNA and RNA were extracted from frozen BM mononuclear cells as described earlier.
We did not find a difference in the risk of AML transformation between CMML1 and CMML2 (P = 0.146).
The 2 mutations in SMC1A were both missense mutations (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 6).
PV.
However, recent studies have demonstrated a novel role for JAK2 in epigenetic regulation.
SRSF2.
Activating mutations of FLT3 and RAS genes are of class I, whereas RUNX1 mutation is of class II.
Karyotype identified a complete monosomy 7 leading to the diagnosis of unclassifiable MDS (MDS-U).
Over the past 3 decades, the classification system for AML has evolved from the French American British (FAB) system, which relied on cytochemical stains and morphology to separate AML from acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and to categorize the disease based on degree of myeloid and monocytic differentiation, to the system developed by the WHO.
Results were concordant for 26 of the 66 specimens (ie, the same results were obtained by all participating laboratories), with 21 positive and 5 negative.
As previously observed in ET, JAK2 (V617F) appears to be highly thrombophilic also in patients with PMF, indicating that this mutation likely causes thrombosis through multiple mechanisms, including activation of platelets and granulocytes.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) remains the most common form of acute leukemia among adults and accounts for the largest number of annual deaths due to leukemias in the United States.
TP53.
Mutations in multiple genes were associated with overall survival in univariate analyses (Table 1).
Sixteen ASXL1 mutations were novel and have not been reported to date (Table 2).
Importantly, they occurred at a higher frequency (about 17%; 14 of 82 cases) in the subset of CN-AML devoid of NPM1, CEBPA, FLT3-ITD, and MLLPTD mutations, and mostly also lacking IDH1 mutations.
The patterns of the 32 mutations consisted of 9 missense mutations, 7 nonsense mutations, 15 frameshift mutations and 1 silent mutation.
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 14.0.1 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
Neither of these genetic mutations is available for testing outside of the research setting.
For instance, Eed+/- mice develop severe, lethal myeloid and lymphoid proliferation.
In an analysis of outcomes between 2 different strategies for matched sibling allogeneic HSCT, outcomes in younger patients (age <= 50 years; n = 35) receiving conventional myeloablative allogeneic HSCT were compared with those in older patients (age > 50 years; n = 39) receiving RIC allogeneic HSCT.
The gene contains a JmjC domain and encodes an H3K27 demethylase.
Table 4. Risk Stratification and Treatment in Polycythemia Vera.
A lower allelic burden in PMF is associated with decreased leukemic-free survival and an inferior prognosis.
In addition, homeostatic control of self-renewal versus differentiation is required to maintain hematopoiesis throughout life.
In sum, most of the available results suggest that SF3B1 mutations convey better survival in the cohort of whole myeloid malignancies, including RARS and RCMD-RS.
Besides, the human GATA2 protein contains two putative SUMOylation sites: MKME (amino acids 221-224) and MKKE (amino acids 388-391).
Six of 7 mutations in STAG1 were missense mutations, while one patient showed a frameshift mutation (Figure 1 and supplemental Table 2).
The presence (vs. the absence) of mutations of ASXL1 carried a more modest hazard ratio for death (1.38 [95% CI, 1.00 to 1.89]), but ASXL1, as the second most commonly mutated gene identified in this study, contributed additional risk to the greatest number of patients.
Similar techniques were used for analyzing the Mayo samples for mutations found to be prognostically relevant in the European cohort: ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, IDH1 and IDH2 (see Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Table S1 for details).
TET2 mutations can be observed as an early, probably disease-initiating event in patients with MPN, and can also be observed as a later disease event in patients with MPN whose disease transforms to AML (BOX 1).
This model was validated in an independent cohort of 268 CMML patients at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, in Tampa, Florida.
Figure 7. Kaplan-Meier analysis of survival of PMF patients stratified according to their genotype, as it was known in different time periods. (A) OS of the whole population of PMF patients: the genetic basis of MPNs was unknown before 2005, and therefore no genotypic subgroup could be defined. (B) PMF patients stratified according to JAK2 or MPL mutation status: these mutant genes where identified in 2005 and 2006, respectively. (C) PMF patients stratified according to JAK2, CALR, or MPL mutation status: somatic mutations of calreticulin were identified in 2013.
Sixteen of 30 RUNX1 mutation-positive CMML patients (53%) progressed to AML compared with 17 of 51 RUNX1 mutationnegative patients (33%) (P = 0.102).
Alternative regimens incorporating intermediate doses of cytarabine (1.5-2 g/m2) may also be reasonable in this group.
She suffered from a chronic genital papillomavirus infection evolving to carcinoma.
His rationale was based on similarities in the trilineage proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells and disease phenotypes.
The e19/a2 type BCR/ABL mRNA transcript (p230) that was initially reported as the molecular basis for some cases of CNL is instead now considered related to an uncommon neutrophilic variant of CML.
As indicated above, GATA2 regulates its own transcription by binding to its promoter and working as an enhancer.
7. IDENTIFYING GATA2-REGULATED TARGET GENES.
For confirmation of somatic mutations, we analyzed paired germline DNA from CD3+ lymphocytes.
Intermediate-1-risk patients who have anemia should be treated with either erythropoietin stimulating agents, testosterone enanthate (400-600 mg intramuscularly/week), fluoxymesterone (10 mg orally, 3 times a day [t.id.]), prednisone (0.5-1.0 mg/kg/day), danazol (600 mg/day), thalidomide (50-200 mg/day), or lenalidomide (10 mg/day).
Recently, a putative tumor suppressor gene, PTEN/MMAC1, has been identified at chromosome 10q23.3, which encodes a 403 amino acid dual-specificity phosphatase containing a region of homology to tensin and auxillin.
ASXL1 gene sequencing was limited to 179 patients, 150 with CMML-1 and 29 with CMML-2, because of limited availability of DNA.
Demonstration of exon 12 mutation in these patients is particularly helpful for ruling out reactive erythrocytosis.
Scheuremann et al identified that the PR-DUB consists of BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) and ASXL1 to deubiquitylate H2AK119 (FIG. 2).
For patients younger than 50 years who received high-dose cytarabine at the 3-g/m2 dose schedule for induction, the rates of treatment-related deaths (10% vs. 5%) and grade 3 or greater neurologic toxicity (16% vs. 2%) were higher than for those who received the standard dose.
The beads were then added to the Flow Chip for sequencing in the SOLiD system (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany), and sequenced according to the manufacturer's protocol (Life Technologies).
In contrast, SF3B1 mutations are associated with generally good prognosis, compatible with their association with RARS, which has a protracted clinical course.
Genomic DNA Preparation.
Figure 1. Location and type of mutations in genes of the cohesin complex in 389 patients with AML, and associations of gene mutations in the AML patient cohort outlined by a Circos diagram.
Mutations in PRC2 components do not seem to be mutually exclusive.
These observations suggest an untapped resource of genetic alterations for disease prognostication and warrant the inclusion of mutation screening for ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH1 as laboratory correlative studies in future clinical trials and prospective observational studies.
Five of the samples resulted in failed amplifications in more than one laboratory, and these had very low DNA concentrations.
INTRODUCTION.
More studies are needed to prove the findings.
Current genetic and functional data suggest that mutations in epigenetic modifiers fall into at least two novel classes: one set of mutations that affect DNA hydroxymethylation (including TET2, IDH1 and IDH2), and a second set that directly regulate DNA methylation and/or the histone state (including MLL, ASXL1 and DNMT3A).
Statistical Analysis.
Conditional deletion of Ezh2 in the haematopoietic compartment results in B-lymphoid defects without alterations of stem or progenitor cell function or of myelopoiesis in vivo.
In fact, most of the cis-acting regulatory motifs for the Gata2 mouse gene reside within a single yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone (250 kb long), since Gata2-deficient mice may be rescued from embryonic lethality with this Gata2-YAC transgene.
Murine models have demonstrated that mutations in TET2 are sufficient to induce a myeloid neoplasm by increased hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and myeloid transformation.
Patients who received initial chemotherapy and experienced a CR had a 45% DFS rate, compared with 10% for patients who did not experience response to chemotherapy before transplantation.
CSF3R is known to signal downstream through both Janus kinase (JAK) and SRC tyrosine kinase pathways, and the 2 classes of CSF3R mutations that we observed exhibit different downstream signaling and kinase inhibitor sensitivities.
Analysis of splicing patterns in 35 U2AF1 target genes has revealed that mutations are associated with dysregulation of cell cycle and RNA processing.
Thirty-three patients had progressed to AML, which was defined as the presence of >=20% blasts in BM or peripheral blood.
These findings strongly suggest that, although BCOR and BCORL1 are homologous genes, they encode for proteins that are likely to play distinctly different roles in normal human cells.
Two variations, GATA2 R396Q (c.1187G A; supplemental Figure 1) and NEK11 D87Y, both genes located on the chromosome 3 that are separated by 2.7 Mb, were identified in the mother and in the 3 children's samples but were absent in the father's sample.
EZH2.
For samples harboring multiple mutations, cloning analysis was carried out to clarify whether the mutations were on the same allele or on different alleles.
Also, U2AF35 mutations were associated with poor prognosis or higher risk of progression to AML in univariate analysis in some series but not in others.
In the ruxolitinib group, 62.7% of patients with a reduction in spleen volume of 35% or more had improvement of 50% or more in spleen-related symptoms (as indicated by the sum of MFSAF scores for abdominal discomfort, pain under the ribs on the left side, and a feeling of fullness [early satiety]); however, this level of improvement also occurred in 46.9% of patients with a reduction in spleen volume of less than 35%.
PcG proteins operate in at least two distinct complexes, PRC1 and PRC2, with a third PcG complex identified in Drosophila melanogaster (the pleiohomeotic repressive complex).
Statistical analyses were performed using Stata 12.1 (StataCorp LP) software.
Screening for JAK2V617F may help increase clinical suspicion of MPN and may be diagnostic in PV, and eliminate the need for bone marrow biopsy (Figure 2).
Several genes have been implicated on chromosome 5, but the relevant genes on chromosome 7 have remained elusive.
Restoration of either Evi1 or Gata2 expression in these cells prevented the failure of in vitro maintenance and proliferation of the HSC Evi1-/- population.
They display the typical WHIM-associated dysfunctions of the CXCR4 chemokine receptor pathway without mutations of CXCR4 that are frequent in WHIM syndrome.
JAK2V617F is a tyrosine kinase gain-of-function mutation in exon 14 that results from a guanine-to-thymine transversion at nucleotide 1849 with substitution of valine to phenylalanine at codon 617.
The OS of cohesin-mutated patients with a related donor was similar compared with patients without a related donor (OS: HR 0.54; 95% CI, 0.06-4.8; P = .58; supplemental Figure 4A-B), suggesting that cohesin gene mutations did not influence the outcome of allogeneic transplantation.
To examine the potential association of cohesin complex mutations with other somatic defects, cases with mutated cohesin complex genes were compared with WT.
Clinical suspicion of PV is most often raised in the context of elevated peripheral blood (PB) counts.
ET should be suspected in patients who present with a platelet count >=450 x 109/L and when clinical evidence of reactive thrombocytosis is not obvious (Table 2).
Three other samples appeared to have adequate DNA but still resulted in failed amplification in more than one laboratory.
5. POST-TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATION OF GATA2.
In our series, GATA2 was overexpressed in 37.4% of cases (97/259), showing that this might a recurrent event in AML.
Disruption of expression of transcription factors regulating proliferation, survival and differentiation of myeloid progenitors is directly linked to acute myeloid leukemogenesis.
To study the germline genotype, immunoselected CD3+ lymphocytes were used.
Compared with PMF patients, those with the myelodysplastic syndrome associated with bone marrow fibrosis have more profound cytopenia and lower circulating CD34-positive cell count.
HpaII digests 5'-CCGG-3' sites when the cytosine in the central CpG dinucleotide is unmethylated, whereas MspI digests methylated and unmethylated DNA at those sites.
The GATA2 protein, like other vertebrate GATA transcription factors, contains a conserved DNA-binding domain composed of two multifunctional ZnF domains (N-ZnF and C-ZnF) of the Cys-X2-Cys-X17-Cys-X2-Cys type.
These observations were confirmed in subsequent studies, although splicing factor mutations seem to be rare in pediatric myeloid neoplasms, including juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.
A stringent algorithm was applied for the identification of SNP-A lesions.
Other mutations, including those in LUC7L2, ZRSR2, and PRPF8, appear to be less prevalent, and, because of the small number of positive cases within the already large cohort studied, we were unable to establish whether these mutations correlated with characteristic phenotypic features and survival.
Additional investigations may include bone marrow biopsy that demonstrate trilineage myeloproliferation and/or the presence of endogenous erythroid colonies on peripheral smear.
When expressed in HeLa cells, the S34F U2AF35 allele induces global defects of splicing, causing abnormal retention of intronic sequences in a wide variety of mature mRNA species.
Mutations in the cohesin gene family members (mainly STAG1, STAG2, SMC3, SMC1A, PDS5B, and RAD21) have been recently reported in myeloid neoplasms.
One patient each had trisomy 13 and trisomy 21 in the whole cohort of CMML patients; it is of note that both patients harbored RUNX1 mutations.
Mutations in DNMT3A have been shown to confer adverse overall survival in patients with cytogenetically defined  intermediate-risk AML, and mutations in TET2 confer adverse overall survival in this risk-subset of AML regardless of FLT3 mutational status.
However, the demonstrated oncogenecity in transgenic mice provides a reasonable rationale for JAK2 inhibition as a targeted treatment strategy.
Analytical Sensitivity.
DISCUSSION.
However, when the four mutations were considered individually, only ASXL1 mutations retained their significance in the context of IPSS (HR: 2.02; P<0.001).
Based on intent-to-treat analysis, patients randomized to the ambulatory arm had a significantly higher 2-year DFS rate (28% vs. 17%; P = .04) and OS rate (from time of CR; 56% vs. 37%; P = .04) compared with the single course of intense chemotherapy consolidation.
To account for the morphologic and cytogenetic diversity of these neoplasms, a well-annotated cohort of 1060 patients with myeloid malignancies including MDS (n = 386), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) (n = 55), MDS/MPNs (n = 169), and AML (n = 450) were analyzed for cohesin gene mutational status, gene expression, and therapeutic and survival outcomes.
During our search for new molecular lesions associated with MDS, we identified somatic mutations affecting various components of the spliceosomal machinery, similar to previous reports.
Patient-specific barcodes and sequencing primers P1 and P2 were ligated to these fragments.
The allele burden varies greatly (between 1% and 100%) from patient to patient at the time of first diagnosis, and low levels of JAK2 V617F are not uncommon.
His younger brother (patient number 7109; P4, III, 3) presented at the age of 15 with severe meningococcal infection associated with mild hematologic abnormalities and an identical GATA2 mutation.
ZRSR2 encodes a protein associated with the U2 auxiliary factor heterodimer.
However, a number of critical issues remain unsolved: what is the molecular mechanism for these mutations to contribute to MDS pathogenesis, to what extent the deregulated RNA splicing could be involved in that process, what is the molecular nature of the predicted gain-of-functions, and what are the targets of these genes.
Of 7 patients with STAG1 mutations, 3 patients also showed an NPM1 mutation.
This model identified four subgroups of patients with median survivals of 24, 15, 8 and 5 months respectively.
In an analysis of data from pediatric and adult patients with AML (N = 1612) enrolled on the United Kingdom Medical Research Council (UK MRC) AML 10 trial, the 5-year survival rates for those with favorable, intermediaterisk, and poor-risk cytogenetics were 65%, 41%, and 14%, respectively.
Using an enhanced sequence-specific approach to examine methylation status, IDH-mutant AMLs were found to have a unique methylation profile that is distinct from AMLs arising from MLL translocations.
Christiansen et al. observed that RUNX1 mutations in chemotherapyrelated MDS were associated with a shorter time to AML transformation, and missense mutations had a shorter survival than those with frameshift or nonsense patterns.
In this regard, the value of Bournemouth, Lille and the International Prognostic Scoring Systems (IPSS) is limited, as they were designed primarily for patients with MDS, excluding CMML patients with a proliferative phenotype.
The reason of rapid AML progression in patients with C-terminal mutation is unclear.
A number of prognostic systems are either based on the old French-American-British classification of CMML (Bournemouth, Modified Bournemouth and Lille) or are not primarily designed for CMML (IPSS, revised IPSS and G-MDAPS).
Some studies in the overall AML population and in patients with intermediate risk reported no significant effect of DNMT3A mutations on survival outcomes, whereas other studies have shown a negative prognostic effect in the overall population or specific subgroups.
In 2008, the World Health Organization expanded the classification of myeloproliferative disorders based on increasing amounts of molecular and cytogenetic data.
Antithrombotic efficacy of hydroxyurea in ET is well established and is recommended for all highrisk patients.
No difference in OS was observed between patients with type 1 and those with type 2 CALR mutation (P = .235), and between patients with type 2 CALR mutation and those with JAK2 (V617F) (P = .311).
For those cases in which a sample was collected after diagnosis, the IPSS risk was recalculated on the basis of clinical variables at the time of sample collection.
Expression signatures associated with cohesin defects.
Table 5. Risk Stratification and Treatment in Essential Thrombocythemia.
In clinical practice, neutrophilia most commonly relates to leukemoid reactions due to chronic infections, inflammatory diseases, or various types of malignancies.
INTRODUCTION.
On the other hand, Yuasa et al reported that the oncogenic transcription factor EVI1 regulates hematopoietic stem cell proliferation through GATA2.
In this disease, GATA2 is a marker predictive of poor outcome.
The prognostic strength of mutations to predict transformation into AML was evaluated in the framework of competing risks; that is, the cumulative incidence of progression to AML was calculated by taking AML-unrelated death as competing risk.
In Wu's study, U2AF1 mutation was found to be an independent poor-risk factor for OS in all patients (P = 0.030) and could predict a shorter time-to-leukemia transformation in younger patients (P = 0.020), particularly in lower-risk MDS patients.
Patients carrying a CALR mutation had a lower risk of thrombosis than those carrying JAK2 (V617F) (P = .021), whereas no significant difference was observed by comparing the other genotypic subgroups.
In mammals, the GATA family is composed of six members that have been divided into two subfamilies on the basis of their spatial and temporal expression patterns.
Treatment with ATRA results in a loss of PRC2 recruitment by PLZF-RARalpha while PRC1-mediated gene repression persists in an ATRA-insensitive manner.
Analysis was performed in 483 European patients and the seminal observations were validated in 396 Mayo Clinic patients.
The median age at the diagnosis of MDS or AML was 15 years (range, 7-35).
Median survival was significantly shorter in the mutationally high-risk compared with the low-risk category (81 versus 148 months; P<0.0001) (Figure 2c).
He underwent HSCT with a matched unrelated donor in April 2012.
However, outcomes in favorable-risk patients who have c-KIT mutations are more similar to those of patients with intermediate-risk karyotype, and these patients should be considered for either clinical trials targeted toward the molecular abnormality or consolidation strategies similar to those used in the intermediate-risk group.
[END OF ABSTRACT].
After adjusting for age, the risk of leukemic transformation remained higher in triple-negative patients compared with JAK2-mutant patients (P = .04), whereas the significance of the difference between triple-negative and CALR-mutant patients was borderline (P = .052).
For older patients (age > 60 years) with AML, the panel recommends using patient performance status, in addition to adverse features (eg, unfavorable cytogenetics and therapy-related AML or prior MDS) and comorbid conditions, to select treatment options rather than relying on a patient's chronologic age alone.
The degree of functional redundancy between GATA1 and GATA2 in the erythroid-megakaryocyte differentiation pathway remains the subject of active investigation.
The JAK2 gene maps to chromosome band 9p24 and encodes a tyrosine kinase protein composed of 1132 amino acids.
GATA2 might be this putative mutator gene suggested by Minelli et al GATA2 mutation could act as a preleukemic event followed by an overt transformation due to the loss of genes located in the long arm of chromosome 7.
For qualitative JAK2 V617F testing, the report should clearly indicate a final analytic result (eg, JAK2 V617F mutation DETECTED or JAK2 V617F mutation NOT DETECTED).
C-ZnF is essential for GATA1 function, since it is responsible for the recognition of the GATA consensus sequence and consequent binding to DNA.
The study was conducted in accordance with the International Conference on Harmonization guidelines for Good Clinical Practice.
To provide quantitative information on the relevance of results, 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of odds ratios (OR) and hazard ratios (HR) were computed.
CALR-mutant ET and CALR-mutant PMF have a relatively indolent clinical course compared with the respective JAK2-mutant disorders.
Subsequently, we studied the effect of the most common spliceosomal mutations on clinical outcomes.
Statistical analyses were performed with the statistical software package SPSS 20.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY).
All factors of Table 2 were therefore included in the new prognostic model, here defined as clinical-molecular prognostic model.
In this latter subgroup, presence of IDH1 or mutations was associated with significantly increased 3-year OS rate compared with patients with NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD and without IDH1 or IDH2 mutations (89% vs. 31%; P < .0001).
The cytogenetic risk group is defined according to Medical Research Council criteria.
As shown in Figure 1A, CALR-mutant patients had a lower cumulative incidence of anemia compared with JAK2-mutant (P <.001), MPL-mutant (P = .004), and triple-negative patients (P <.001).
This explains, at least in part, the lack of efficacy of ATRA in PLZF-RARalpha-positive APL (FIG. 4).
Although initial studies identified metabolic alterations in samples of IDH-mutant AML and glioma, the mechanism by which these mutations contribute to malignant transformation was not known.
Although, traditionally, histomorphology-based schemes have been applied to subclassify patients with MDS, this approach is unlikely to be reflective of the underlying pathogenesis.
The NPM1 mutation has been shown to be associated NK-AML with a reported frequency of 48% to 53%.
PMF.
These SUMOylation consensus sequences are conserved among GATA family members.
However, in CN-AML patients, in patients with mutated NPM1, and in the NPM1 mutated/FLT3 wild-type subgroup of patients, cohesin mutations had no impact on outcome.
On a multivariable analysis, only increased AMC (>10 x 109/l, RR 2.5, 95% CI 1.7-3.8), presence of circulating IMC (RR 2.0, 95% CI 1.4-2.7), decreased hemoglobin (<10 g/dl, RR 1.6, 99% CI 1.2-2.2) and decreased platelet count (<100 x 109/l, RR 1.4, 99% CI 1.0-1.9) retained significance.
Another recent study evaluating treatment in older patients (age 60-70 years) compared outcomes between RIC allogeneic HSCT (reported to the Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research; n = 94) and standard chemotherapy induction and postremission therapy from the CALGB studies (n = 96).
Other options for consolidation strategies include one or more cycles of high-dose cytarabine followed by autologous HSCT or allogeneic HSCT from matched sibling or unrelated donors.
The incidence of monosomal karyotype increased with age, from 4% in patients aged 30 years or younger to 20% in those older than 60 years.
Nevertheless the potential mechanisms of pathogenesis remain largely unknown.
TRANSCRIPTION REGULATION.
Also, proinflammatory cytokines that play an important role in myelofibrosis signal through JAK 1 (JAK1) and JAK2.
Statistical analysis.
The significance of these differences remains to be elucidated. Whether the aberrant transcripts in these candidate tumor suppressor genes are important in leukemogenesis or are merely the consequence of splicing infidelity in leukemic cells needs further investigation.
In our cohort of CMML patients, the Mayo prognostic model outperformed the MDAPS, G-MDAPS and the Spanish cytogenetic risk models.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 30 healthy volunteers were used to assess the frequency of germline single nucleotide variants (SNVs).
On the other hand, low levels ( 1%) of the mutant JAK2 have been reported in ET patients (as determined using allele-specific loop-mediated amplification assay).
ABSTRACT.
Fig. 1. RT-PCR analysis of the expression of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene. (A) Abnormal transcripts are noted in AML patients (cases 10, 22, 24, 35, and 72) and normal controls (N6, N7, N10, N16). (B) Abnormal transcripts in cell lines. Lane 1, U937; lane 2, Raji; lane 3, HL60; lane 4, KG-1; lane 5, K562. M represents pGem marker.
Abbreviations: HCT = hematopoietic stem cell transplant; IPSS = international prognostic scoring system; PMF = primary myelofibrosis.
Extramedullary presentation, including central nervous system (CNS) disease, is uncommon in patients with AML.
These percentages are similar to those reported in published epidemiologic studies of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Although a gain-of-function mutation of EZH2 (Try641) has been identified in follicular lymphoma (7.2%) and germinal center B-cell subtype diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (21.7%), loss-of-function mutations in EZH2 have been found in MDS and MDS/MPN.
In 2008, the Global MDAPS (G-MDAPS) was developed for patients with de novo MDS, secondary MDS and CMML (n = 1915).
Patient number 5758 (P4, III, 1) presented with numerous and extensive warts associated with a mild neutropenia since the age of 6, a profound monocytopenia, and deficiencies of B cells and NK cells (Table 1 and supplemental Table 2).
Overall and leukemia-free survival correlates of mutations.
Primary analysis was performed on OS.
Targeted gene panels assessed by next-generation sequencing are increasingly being used in clinical laboratories.
The mononuclear cells from BM samples were obtained by Ficoll-Hypaque density gradient centrifugation (1.077 g/ml; cryofetal bovine; Amersham Pharmacia, Buckinghamshire, UK) and preserved in 10% dimethylsulfoxide and 20% serum at -70--Degree--C or in liquid nitrogen until test.
The mutations consisted of 9 missense, 1 silent, 7 nonsense and 15 frameshift mutations.
The only notable difference was that patients with the SF3B1 mutations had a higher percentage of BM ring sideroblast (P<0.0001), lower median WBC (P = 0.04) and a lower ALC (P = 0.045).
Furthermore, we performed a survival analysis taking both EZH2 and TET2 mutations into account, as TET2-mutated patients showed a better survival in our first analysis (Figure 1c).
Another option for this group is 1 to 2 cycles of high-dose cytarabine-based consolidation followed by autologous HSCT, if allogeneic transplant is not an available option.
In the subgroup of patients with CN-AML (n = 201), we identified 16 patients with mutations in the cohesin complex (8%).
The exception is an MDS subtype, refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts and thrombocytosis, in which the frequency of JAK2V617F mutation is estimated to be 50%.
4.1. THE 'GATA SWITCH' DURING ERYTHROID DIFFERENTIATION.
The U2AF1/U2AF35 gene is located at 21q22.3 and encodes U2 auxiliary factor protein, which recognizes the AG splice acceptor dinucleotide at the 3 end of introns during RNA splicing.
Patients with mutations of these genes, as compared with patients who did not have such mutations, were also more likely to have an elevated blast percentage (Fig. 3B), but the two groups did not differ significantly with respect to neutropenia or anemia (Fig. 3C).
The Mayo prognostic model was then validated in an independent cohort of 268 patients with WHO-defined CMML at the H.
We did not observe widespread defective splicing, but rather distinct changes in specific introns, as seen in RUNX1, that would functionally have the same effect as RUNX1 mutations.
The function of hematopoietic GATA factors has been extensively examined, and various in vivo experimental approaches have been explored to assess their activity in an integrated context.
In another cohort, mutated STAG2 was found in 6% of patients with MDS, both low-grade (RCMD) and high-grade (RAEB).
Similarly, overall survival was significantly worse for CMML patients with SETBP1 mutations.
Figure 2. Comparison of the Mayo prognostic model for CMML, with the MD Anderson model, Global MD Anderson model and the Spanish cytogenetic risk-stratification system.
The Kaplan-Meier method was used to analyze survival outcomes (OS) of subgroups characterized by the presence of mutant versus wild-type (WT) variants of specific spliceosome-associated gene mutations with the log-rank test (JMP9; SAS Institute).
Other relevant genes were assessed for frequently occurring mutations or expression levels as previously described (ie, FLT3-ITD, nucleophosmin1 [NPM1], DNMT3A, IDH1, IDH2, and MLL5).
In vivo studies demonstrated the induction of PV-, ET-, and PMF-like diseases in JAK2V617F-positive transgenic mice and the relative disease phenotypes could be partially anticipated by allelic burden.
ETV6.
Consequently, GATA2 expression is also regulated by GATA2 itself and GATA1.
The cDNA PCR was carried out in an Expand Long Template PCR system (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), which is composed of buffer 3 with a unique enzyme mix containing a mixture of Taq DNA polymerase and Tgo DNA polymerase (1.25 U in 25 ml); the latter is a thermostable DNA polymerase with proofreading activity.
Among STAG2 sequence alterations, 62 out of 63 predicted loss of function, including frameshift (n = 19), splice site (n = 10), and/or nonsense (n = 33) mutations.
By contrast, PRC1 is more appropriately thought of as a collection of different complexes on the basis of genomic duplication of the core PRC1 complex between D. melanogaster and mammalian evolutionary development.
This increased cellular proliferation may be relevant to the pathobiology of aCML.
The survival outcome for patients with unfavorable cytogenetics was poor, with a median OS of only 10 months in both treatment arms.
RT-PCR and cDNA Sequencing Analysis.
When the Gata2 promoter region was analyzed, they found that EVI1 directly binds to the Gata2 promoter as an enhancer, showing that Gata2 is one of critical targets for EVI1 and that transcription factors regulate the HSC pool hierarchically.
Using these four independent risk factors, we prepared the Mayo prognostic model for CMML, consisting of three risk categories: low risk (0 risk factors), intermediate risk (one risk factor) and high risk (two or more risk factors), with median survivals of 32, 18.5 and 10 months, respectively (Figure 2).
The prevalence of grade 3 or 4 anemia peaked after approximately 8 to 12 weeks of ruxolitinib therapy, subsequently decreasing to levels similar to those in patients who received placebo.
RUNX1 mutations have been described in chemotherapyrelated MDS, MDS of atomic bomb survivors or in de novo MDS, whereas RUNX1 mutations were rarely reported in CMML.
Of note, in the vast majority of cases the remaining DNMT3A allele remains wild-type, suggesting that DNMT3A haploinsufficiency is sufficient to contribute to myeloid transformation.
The familial segregation of the GATA2 R396Q mutation (GATA2 gene location according to hg19, chr3:128.2 Mb) in pedigree 1 was investigated using 4 highly polymorphic short tandem repeats (STRs), 2 of which were centromeric to GATA2 (D3S3606 and D3S3607, located at chr3:127.2 Mb and chr3:127.3 Mb, respectively) and 2 of which were telomeric to GATA2 (D3S1587 and D3S1292 located at chr3:130.8 Mb and chr3:131.6 Mb, respectively).
Mutations of the MPL gene occur in BCR-ABL1-negative MPN.
Given the fact that both GATA1 and GATA2 have key roles in controlling the proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells, defects arising from mutations in these genes have long been suspected as possible contributions to hematopoietic disorders, including leukemia.
In 2003, the International Working Group for the Diagnosis and Standardization of Response Criteria accepted the cytochemical and immunophenotypic criteria of WHO as the standard for diagnosing AML, including the reporting of dysplasia according to morphology.
Recommendations for induction chemotherapy in patients with AML consider age 60 years as a therapeutic divergence point.
Based on the protocol-specified final analysis of the primary end point (OS), decitabine was associated with a statistically nonsignificant trend for increased median OS compared with physician's choice (7.7 vs. 5 months; HR, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.69-1.04; P = .10).
Reports of quantitative JAK2 V617F assays should include a statement of qualitative results (eg, JAK2 V617F mutation DETECTED), as well as a statement of quantitative allele burden.
Fig. 1. Epigenetic regulations - simplified DNA methylation/histone modification. Adopted and modified based on Li KK et al., Semin Hematol 2013;50:48-60 and http://www.activemotif.com/stem-cell-identity. (A) DNA methylation is regulated by DNMT3 as hemi-methylated form and maintained by DNMT1 to full-methylated DNA. Mutations (red fond) impair DNA methylation. (B) DNMTs add methyl group in C5 (carbon 5) position of cytosines to produce 5mC, while TETs catalyze 5mC to 5hmC, then some other factors turn 5hmC back to cytosine. (C) There are two polycomb repressive complexes, 1 and 2, and constitute totally different components as shown. PRC2 is incorporated to chromatin which allows trimethylation of histone H3 Lys27 by EZH2. The consequence of trimethylation of Lys27 is to recruit PRC1 via CBX. PRC1 interacts with nonadjacent regions of chromatin that further represses gene expression the function of H2AK119ub1 is to repress transcript elongation by RNA polymerase II. The ASXL1 gene regulates epigenesis through interaction with PRC2 while the PRC2 complex serves to put 1-3 methyl groups on the 27th lysine residue of histone H3 (H3K27). Mutations in ASXL1 and EZH2 alter Polycomb functions so as to cause inappropriate differentiation and perpetual self-renewal of cancer stem cells. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Results.
Ongoing investigations are trying to identify the molecular basis of PMF with nonmutated JAK2, CALR, or MPL, and to better define the distinctive features of these patients.
Also, EZH2 and ASXL1 mutations were neither associated with CMML subtype, dysplastic/myeloproliferative characteristics, age, karyotype, white blood cell count, platelets count, hemoglobin or gender (Supplementary Information 2).
Besides, it has been shown that the hematopoietic GATA factors interact with multiple transcription factors, coactivators and co-repressors, regulating the expression of several lineage-specific genes.
Following the identification of IDH1 and DNMT3A mutations, this strategy has recently led to the discovery that two homologous genes, i.e. BCOR and BCORL1, are recurrently mutated in AML.
The recurrent mutation of U2AF1 is a missense mutation affecting the serine at codon 34 (Ser34) (8.7% of de novo MDS).
Clonal hierarchy analysis rarely identified cohesin mutations in founding clones; rather, cohesins were present in subclones that underwent clonal expansion over time.
Associated morbidities.
Thus, in early erythroid progenitors GATA2 binds to GATA motifs that reside in five discrete regions within the GATA2 gene (-77, -3.9, -2.8, -1.8 and +9.5 kb from the IS exon).
Moreover, overexpression of particular genes has been associated with prognosis in AML, making it possible to identify patients with different risks of relapse within cytogenetic risk groups.
We then analyzed the categorical clinical-molecular score as a covariate in a Cox survival regression model.
This results in decreased global arginine methylation of the PRMT5 targets histone H2A and histone H4 and in altered haematopoietic progenitor cell expansion and erythroid differentiation.
The differential counts were within the normal range without evident myeloid cytologic abnormalities.
The molecular pathogenesis of cancers including leukemias involves a stepwise accumulation of mutations affecting both cellular oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.
Activating mutations of FLT3 or RAS gene in CMML patients with RUNX1 mutations.
Allele burden may also be reported in semiquantitative fashion (eg, >50% to 75% mutant alleles).
Such nonmutated cohesin low expressors have been described in both AML and Ewing sarcoma cell lines.
One patient (patient number 6183) presented with an urethral malposition that was corrected at the age of 2, and 1 patient (patient number 6225) presented with a thigh fibroma at the age of 3.
Table 1. 2008 World Health Organization Diagnostic Criteria for Polycythemia Vera.
Patient number 5593 (P3, II, 2) developed chronic neutropenia at the age of 30 associated with numerous HPV-induced warts since age of 14 years.
MASS-SPECTROMETRIC GENOTYPING.
Somatic loss of function of HDAC8 impairs SMC3 deacetylation, leading to decreased cohesin occupancy and altered transcriptional programs, underscoring a role for cohesin in gene regulation.
As a result, defects in the expression levels or the activity of these transcription factors are intimately linked to hematopoietic disorders, including leukemia.
Heritable GATA2 mutations are associated with deafness, lymphedema, mononuclear cytopenias, susceptibility to infections, familial myelodysplasia (MDS), and AML.
A subset of these patients had mutations in cohesin complex members and reduced expression of STAG2/RAD21/SMC3; indeed, we noted that most patients with cohesin mutations had reduced expression of the entire cohesin complex.
A similar high mutation burden was also detected in RUNX1 (median 46.7%), TET2 (median 44.6%) and CBL (median 42.5%), whereas the burden was low in RAS pathway alterations, that is, NRAS (median 11.1%), KRAS (median 27%) or JAK2 V617F mutations (median 6.9%).
Clinical Effect of Point Mutations in Myelodysplastic Syndromes.
European cohort.
V Grossmann; A Kohlmann; C Eder; C Haferlach; W Kern; NCP Cross; T Haferlach; S Schnittger.
The use of these parameters led to the definition of the International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS), which identifies 4 prognostic groups with substantially different survival in PMF.
However, there are few studies analyzing the role of GATA2 in hematological malignancies.
The most-effective alternative treatments to hydroxyurea in PV and ET are INF-alpha and busulfan.
Clinicopathologic characteristics of aCML include splenomegaly and a neutrophilic leukocytosis with left shift and prominent granulocytic dysplasia (eg, hypogranular and hypolobated neutrophils, abnormal chromatin clumping, pseudo-Pelger-Hoet neutrophils).
However, the context that determines these opposite activities is not clear.
Figure 1. Somatic spliceosomal gene (U2AF1, SF3B1, SRSF2, LUC7L2, PRPF8, and ZRSR2) mutations as detected by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and Sanger sequencing technologies. (A) With the use of an NGS-based whole exome sequencing analysis of whole BM DNA from a patient with refractory cytopenia with unilineage dysplasia (left), a mutation of U2AF1 (21q22.3) at position 44514 777 (T > C) was detected in 13 of 18 reads. Analysis of DNA from CD3+ cells showed a much lower frequency of the base change (2 of 15 reads; right), highlighting the somatic nature of this alteration. The finding was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Arrows and bars indicate the specific nucleotide and predicted codon, respectively. It should be noted that U2AF1 is expressed from the minus strand; therefore, the NGS presentation (top panels) is complementally reversed in comparison to the Sanger sequencing results (middle panels). This heterozygous somatic mutation results in the predicted nucleotide change 470 A > G in exon 6 of the coding region, which lead to the amino acid change Q157R in the second zinc finger domain. In the entire cohort, 27 mutations were observed in 26 patients, including a whole gene deletion. All 26 missense mutations were located in 1 of the 2 zinc finger domains (ZNFs); 2 residues, S34 or Q157, were frequently affected (bottom panels). RRM indicates RNA recognition motif. (B) With the use of an NGS analysis of a patient with CMML (middle left), a mutation of SF3B1 (2q33.1) at position 198 267 491(C > G) was detected in 9 of 24 reads. The somatic nature of this alteration was confirmed by an analogous analysis of the CD3+ fraction, with the change being less frequent (2 of 23; middle right). The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing (bottom). This heterozygous somatic mutation results in the nucleotide change 1866 G > T in exon 14 of SF3B1, resulting in the amino acid change E622D in the HSH155 domain. Analysis of the entire cohort identified mutations in 33 patients, including a case with a whole gene deletion. (C) Further screening by NGS led to the detection of a nonsense mutation (R27X) in LUC7L2 (7q34; top) which participates in the recognition of splice donor sites in association with the U1 snRNP spliceosomal subunit, and a missense mutation (M1307I) in PRPF8 (17p13.3; bottom) which is a large U5 snRNP-specific protein essential for pre-mRNA splicing. RS indicates serine/arginine-rich domain; U5 2-snRNA bdg, U5-snRNA binding site 2; and MPN, Mpr1p, Pad1p N-terminal domain. (D) Mutations of SRSF2, an arginine/serine-rich splicing factor, were detected in 29 cases among the entire cohort, including 2 whole gene deletions and a microdeletion within the gene (top). All mutations were heterozygous and affected P95. The somatic nature of the P95R mutation was confirmed with whole BM and T-cell rich fraction DNAs (bottom). (E)Anonsense mutation (W153X) was found in ZRSR2, another arginine/serine-rich splicing regulatory factor, in a case of CMML. ZRSR2 is located at Xp22.2, and the nonsense mutation was hemizygous in this male case (BM).
ABSTRACT.
Allele heterozygosity is more common in ET compared with homozygosity in PV and PMF, which is thought to result from mitotic recombination.
About one-third of AML patients harbor well-defined chromosomal translocations and are included as a distinct entity named "AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities" in the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of myeloid neoplasms.
Candidate mutations detected in whole-genome--amplified DNA were validated with the use of nonamplified DNA (see the Methods section, Table 4, and Fig. 1 in the Supplementary Appendix).
To modulate GATA-mediated transcription, the FOG1 protein is believed to recruit other transcriptional co-factors to the GATA1/FOG1 complex.
One of the major regulatory protein degradation pathways is the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, in which the poly-ubiquitination of target protein is the trigger for degradation.
Decisions regarding the use and choice of antibiotics to prevent and treat infections should be made by the individual institutions based on the prevailing organisms and their drug resistance patterns.
The Dusseldorf score classified patients into three risk categories, with median survivals of 93 (low), 26 (intermediate) and 11 (high) months, respectively.
Improvements in symptoms were measured with the use of the modified MFSAF, version 2.0, diary, a tool designed specifically to assess symptoms of myelofibrosis.
Further investigation is needed to determine which role the cohesin-complex fulfills in AML and whether cohesin mutations have clinical implications.
Karyotypes were established from bone marrow (BM) aspiration using standard procedures and described according to the International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature.
However, in low-risk MDS, patients with SF3B1 mutations showed a tendency toward better prognosis (P = .09), whereas those with SRSF2 mutations had worse survival.
Mutational analysis.
Risk of leukemia was significantly increased in EZH2-(P = 0.03), ASXL1-(P<0.0001), SRSF2-(P = 0.007) and IDH1- or IDH2-(P<0.0001) mutated patients (Figure 2b).
High-dose cytarabine, when used as part of induction therapy, may substitute for intrathecal chemotherapy because it crosses the blood-brain barrier; the CSF must then be reassessed after completion of induction therapy, and further therapy should be given as appropriate.
Even among the subgroup with favorable karyotypes, those with therapy-related AML tend to do less well.
JH2, which resides upstream to JH1, is structurally similar to JH1 but functions as a pseudokinase domain that negatively regulates basal activity of the kinase domain and receptor-induced activation of the catalytic function.
These mRNAs code for two proteins with the same translation start site, located at exon 2.
Cantor et al found that FOG1 expression in mast cell precursors blocks their maturation into mast cells, demonstrating that repression of FOG1 is a critical step for mast cell development.
Co-occurrence of U2AF1 mutations with ASXL1 and DNMT3A mutations have been noted as well.
Table 2. 2008 World Health Organization Diagnostic Criteria for Essential Thrombocythemia.
A recent retrospective study based on data in older patients (age 50-70 years) with AML compared outcomes in patients who underwent allogeneic HSCT (either myeloablative conditioning or RIC; n = 152) and those who did not receive HSCT in first CR (chemotherapy only; n = 884).
Recent mechanistic studies have revealed specific molecular hallmarks that distinguished these unoccupied elements from a highly restricted subset of occupied composite elements.
In conclusion, ruxolitinib was associated with reductions in splenomegaly and symptoms that are prominent manifestations of myelofibrosis and appeared to be associated with an improvement in overall survival.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization testing for BCR-ABL1 and PDGFRA/B was negative in all cases.
The 10-year cumulative incidence of thrombosis was 18.3% (95% confidence interval [CI], 13.3-24.1) in patients carrying JAK2 (V617F), 13.6% (95% CI, 6.9-22.7) in those with CALR mutation, 17.9% (95% CI, 4.1-39.6) in those with MPL mutation, and 16.2% (95% CI, 6.3-30.1) in triple-negative subjects (Figure 2).
As previously mentioned, FLT3-TKD in the presence of FLT3-ITD or occurring with t(15;17)/PML-RARA seems to be associated with poorer prognosis.
Allogeneic HCT is also potentially curative in PV and ET, but the already high rates of long-term survival with these diseases preclude the use of aggressive therapy with a high risk of mortality.
Connelly et al identified five single nucleotide polymorphisms in GATA2 that were significantly associated with early-onset coronary arterydisease.
Postremission Surveillance and Salvage Therapy for AML.
If a quantitative assay is clinically indicated to achieve precise mutant levels or to monitor allele burden, there will be a need for quantitative standards to accurately quantify the allele burden and to assess the sensitivity and dynamic range of the assay.
The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was applied to compare measures of quantitative variables repeated in different phases of the disease.
Future work to dissect these potential functions of ASXL1 and BAP1 in a haematopoietic-specific mammalian context are of importance to the field.
In AML, SETBP1 overexpression is significantly associated with reduced survival, indicating that SETBP1 may be relevant to leukemia oncogenesis.
The procedures followed were in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000, and samples were obtained after patients had provided written informed consent.
We identified somatic mutations in 18 genes, including two, ETV6 and GNAS, that have not been reported to be mutated in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Cytogenetic analysis was performed successfully in 53 patients.
In contrast to JAK2 mutations, MPL mutations were found less frequently in PMF and ET, and may be present in either JAK2 mutation-positive or mutation-negative cases.
GATA2 is phosphorylated in HPCs through the MAPK signal transduction pathway in response to IL-3.
We assigned each factor an integer weight according to the corresponding HR in the multivariable-Cox regression (Table 2): weight 1 for presence of constitutional symptoms, peripheral blood blasts >=1%, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, and presence of JAK2 mutation; weight 2 for MPL mutation or nonmutated JAK2, CALR, and MPL, WBC count >25 x 109/L, and age >65 years.
Cytogenetic findings were divided into three categories, namely, good (normal, -Y, del[5q], del[20q]), poor (complex or chromosome 7 anomalies) and intermediate (all other abnormalities), according to the criteria developed by the International MDS Risk Analysis Workshop.
Collectively, these studies suggest that RIC allogeneic HSCT is a feasible treatment option for patients aged 60 years and older, particularly those in first CR with minimal comorbidities and who have an available donor.
The primary end point was reached in 41.9% of patients in the ruxolitinib group as compared with 0.7% in the placebo group (P<0.001).
Proficiency testing for JAK2 V617F is now standard, and it is likely that MPL codon 515 mutations will be added in the future.
TET2 mutations occur in 10-20% of cases of MPN and MDS and in 7-23% of cases of AML (TABLE 1).
As shown in Figure 1 and Table 1, seven patients had eight missense mutations at RHD and one patient had a missense mutation at the C-terminal region, all resulting in single amino-acid substitutions.
The guidelines note that RIC allogeneic HSCT is considered an additional option for patients aged 60 years and older for the following situations: 1) as postremission therapy in those experiencing a CR to induction therapy, or 2) as treatment of induction failure (in the context of a clinical trial) only in patients with low-volume disease.
In 2008, the WHO revised the diagnostic and response criteria for AML to include additional recurrent genetic abnormalities created by reciprocal translocations/inversions, and a new provisional category for some of the molecular markers that have been found to have prognostic impact.
Epigenetic roles for class I and class II genes.
Median follow-up was 3.7 years (range 0-27.9) for the European and 3.4 years (range 0-26) for the Mayo cohorts.
==============================================================================`
Our analysis showed a similar expression profile in patients with STAG2 mutations or patients with reduced expression of cohesin complex members (Figure 6A).
Mutational Analysis of PTEN/MMAC1 by PCR-SSCP and Direct Sequencing.
This abnormality of ABCB7 protein induced by SF3B1 mutation could explain the mechanism that results in the ring-sideroblast phenotype.
Two patients had biallelic heterozygous mutations.
In univariate analysis, significant risk factors for survival included anemia, thrombocytopenia, increased levels of white blood cells, absolute neutrophils, absolute monocyte count (AMC), absolute lymphocytes, peripheral blood and bone marrow blasts, and presence of circulating immature myeloid cells (IMCs).
More than one quarter (26%) of the samples with at least one TET2 mutation had two distinct TET2 mutations, suggesting that biallelic loss of wild-type TET2 contributes to the pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes in some cases.
A hypercellular bone marrow is observed with a myeloid hyperplasia and prominent granulocytic dysplasia, although multilineage dysplasia may be present.
The frequency of type 1 mutation in patients with PMF was significantly higher than that previously reported by us in patients with ET16 (72% vs 46%, P <.001).
Patients of 2 of the pedigrees described herein (P3 and P5) have a syndrome related to the WHIM syndrome, although the BM myelokathexis feature was missing.
To the best of our knowledge, mutations of RUNX1 have only been described in two patients with CMML.
We then analyzed the effect of these mutations in more clinically uniform subgroups to more precisely determine their clinical consequences.
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of RUNX1b mutations in 30 patients with CMML. CMML, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
One laboratory found a third specimen positive for W515L, but the mutation was not detected in the other two laboratories that tested this specimen.
The inclusions criteria of the registry are: neutrophil count lower than 0.5 G/L observed at least 3 times in a period of 3 months or a neutrophil count lower than 1 G/L observed at least 3 times in a period of 3 months associated with infection.
Granulocyte JAK2 (V617F) mutation status and mutant allele burden were assessed using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction-based allelic discrimination assay on a Rotor-Gene 6000 real-time analyzer (Qiagen), as previously described.
Risk scores were calculated according to the International Prognostic Scoring System.
The value of cellular markers as a complement to histologic classification was first validated in CML with the discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome and the characterization of the oncogenic BCR-ABL1 fusion protein.
Interestingly, more recent data suggests that cohesin genes have additional functions within the cell such as double-strand DNA repair and regulation of transcription.
For the moment, no prognostic information is available concerning BCORL1 mutations and this needs to be clarified.
RESULTS.
IDH1 is a cytosolic enzyme, whereas IDH2 is found in mitochondria.
Facing a patient with PMF, his or her genetic lesion must now be taken into account carefully because this has an impact on clinical decision-making.
AM Vannucchi; TL Lasho; P Guglielmelli; F Biamonte; A Pardanani; A Pereira; C Finke; J Score; N Gangat; C Mannarelli; RP Ketterling; G Rotunno; RA Knudson; MC Susini; RR Laborde; A Spolverini; A Pancrazzi; L Pieri; R Manfredini; E Tagliafico; R Zini; A Jones; K Zoi; A Reiter; A Duncombe; D Pietra; E Rumi; F Cervantes; G Barosi; M Cazzola; NCP Cross; A Tefferi.
The differential use of these two exons was first described in GATA1 and subsequently in GATA2 and GATA3.
The use of next-generation sequencing and mass spectrometry has subsequently revealed genetic abnormalities, which have been verified in 20-25% of patients with MDS and in 30-60% of patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML).
Patients whose performance status would make them poor candidates for the standard antineoplastic regimens may still be able to participate in clinical trials using epigenetic agents designed to target this underserved patient population.
INTRODUCTION.
Transplant should be considered only if the patient has entered remission or in the context of a clinical trial.
Nested PCR was carried out using primers flanking the full coding sequence of the PTEN/MMAC1 cDNA, as shown in Table I.
Treatment-related mortality at 100 days was 18%, 19%, and 35% respectively.
Common to all eukaryotes, this mechanism allows for generating a large diversity of protein species in the face of limited set of genes by alternative splicing.
About half of all grade 3 or 4 adverse events of anemia in the ruxolitinib group occurred during the first 8 weeks of therapy.
Figure 2. Schematic representation of MPL gene and mutation hot spots. Locations of reported mutations are indicated by colored triangles: red triangles for W515L and W515K, and black triangles for other SNP variant mutations. Representative codon numbers are marked above exon boxes. CP, cytoplasmic domain; DCR-NRD, distal cytokine receptor domain-negative regulatory domain; PCR-LBR, proximal cytokine receptor domain-ligand binding region; TM, transmembrane domain.
CALR-mutant patients had a significantly longer large-splenomegaly-free survival compared with the remaining patients with PMF (P <.001, data not shown).
LOH Analysis.
One laboratory tested only a subset of the specimens.
Considering the CMML-1 and CMML-2 category (Supplementary Figure 1), a significant prognostic difference was detectable for CMML-2 (P = 0.009) but not more for CMML-1 (P = 0.063).
In addition, one laboratory provided formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of spleen from a patient with polycythemia vera.
Our results showed that 72% of RUNX1 mutations in CMML were located at the N-terminal region and 28% at the C-terminal region.
In a prespecified analysis of biomarkers, patients who received ruxolitinib had mean reductions in the JAK2V617F allele burden of 10.9% at week 24 and 21.5% at week 48; patients who received placebo had a mean increase of 3.5% at week 24 and 6.3% at week 48 (Fig. S6 in the Supplementary Appendix).
These complexes serve an important function that is conserved throughout vertebrate development, in which PcG protein complexes initiate and maintain transcriptional silencing through specific post-translational histone modifications.
An additional post hoc analysis showed an improvement of 50% or more in nonabdominal symptoms (night sweats, bone or muscle pain, and pruritus) in 58.6% of patients with reductions in spleen volume of 35% or more and in 54.1% of patients with reductions in spleen volume of less than 35%.
Two-sided P values <.05 were considered significant in the primary analysis and indicators for a trend in all additional analyses.
Future experience with these agents will inform whether complete hematologic remissions and indepth molecular responses are realized, similar to experience with TKIs in CML and PDGFRA/B-rearranged myeloid neoplasms associated with eosinophilia.
Interestingly, among patients with AML, ASXL1 mutations seem to occur in an age-dependent manner and are more enriched in AML from an antecedent haematological disorder rather than in de novo AML.
DNMT3A mutations are enriched in patients with cytogenetically defined intermediate-risk AML and in patients with class M4 or M5 AML (as defined by the French-American-British (FAB) classification system).
Because of the strong association between NPM1 and cohesin mutations, the allelic ratio of mutated and wild-type NPM1 was compared with the allelic ratio of mutated and wild-type cohesin genes.
Because the maternal grandfather had no clinical or biologic phenotypes, we focused our analysis on the GATA2 R396Q mutation.
Routine screening LPs are not warranted at the time of diagnosis in patients with AML.
Germline point mutations of RUNX1 (runt-related transcription factor 1) were first described in familial platelet disorders evolving to AML.
All RT-PCR products were then subjected to direct sequencing analysis.
Protein tyrosine phosphatases have been thought to play a role in tumor suppression due to antagonize the activity of the protein tyrosine kinase.
These adverse events were manageable, as evidenced by the low discontinuation rate (one patient in each group for each event).
Symptoms and Other Patient-Reported Outcomes.
It is conceivable that identified inactivating mutations of this gene may comprise a mechanism of altered histone demethylation, leading to a transcriptional repression of tumor suppressor genes.
This is in line with recent investigations showing that Drosophila E(z) as well as other PRC1 and PRC2 components may exert tumor suppressor activity by silencing the mitogenic JAK-STAT and Notch signaling pathways.
Although the presence of FLT3-TKD mutations has been shown to be associated with shorter remission durations (eg, decreased DFS) and decreased OS outcomes in some studies, other studies have reported no impact of FLT3-TKD on prognosis or even a favorable outcome on OS with FLT3-TKD mutations.
Adapted from Tefferi et al.
Pathway mutations involving the RNA splicing machinery.
Additional JAK2 mutations have now been described on exon 12, with N542-E543 being the most common.
Other alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent oxygenases include enzymes involved in hypoxia sensing, collagen biosynthesis, lipid biosynthesis and DNA and RNA demethylation.
Table 1. Clinical and laboratory features and subsequent events in 226 patients with World Health Organization defined chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
ANC indicates absolute neutrophil count; ALC, absolute lymphocyte count; AMC, absolute monocyte count; Hb, hemoglobin; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CR, complete remission; and HPV, human papillomavirus.
There is a lack of standardization among the variety of qualitative and quantitative methods available to detect the range of molecular alterations in JAK2 and MPL.
A study has reported that mutational inactivation of STAG2 resulted in abnormal chromosomal ploidy in human cancer.
TET2.
The mean hemoglobin level in patients who received ruxolitinib reached a nadir of 95 g per liter after approximately 8 to 12 weeks of therapy (Fig. S8 in the Supplementary Appendix), with an increase by week 24 to a new steady state (101 g per liter).
Pretreatment samples from all patients were studied centrally by G- and R-banding analysis.
We aimed to identify the prevalence of mutations in CMML, identify any associations between them, as well as their correlation with morphology, cytogenetics and survival.
Safety.
Combination therapy with thalidomide and prednisone or lenalidomide and prednisone is associated with higher response rates, 40% and 30%, respectively, and decreased toxicity.
Traditional therapies for PV and ET remain effective, but the treatments and prognosis for PMF are comparatively poor.
They also had a lower risk of thrombosis compared with patients carrying JAK2 (V617F).
Long-term haematopoietic stem cell (LT-HSC).
From September 2009 through April 2010, a total of 309 patients were enrolled: 155 were randomly assigned to ruxolitinib, and 154 were randomly assigned to placebo.
The epigenetic regulator gene UTX (KDM6A), ubiquitously transcribed X chromosome tetratricopeptide repeat protein, is found on chromosome Xp11.2.
The gene encoded tumor protein TP53 binds directly to DNA and determines whether the damaged DNA undergoes repair and apoptosis.
Fig. 1. GATA2 genomic and protein structure.  Schematic representation of the GATA2 human gene and protein.  The GATA2 locus has 6 exons (dark grey).  A new transcript form with 7 exons has recently added to online databases.  The 5 and 3 untranslated region are shown in light grey.  Arrows indicate transcription start sites from the IS and IG first exons.  The encoded protein has two transactivation domains (TAD), a negative regulatory domain (NRD), a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and two zinc finger (ZnF) domains.  Phosphorilation (P), acetylation (Ac) SUMOylation (S) and ubiquitination (U) sites are shown.  Protein interactions through the GATA2 N-ZnF and C-ZnF domains are also shown.
This suggests a crucial role for epigenetic modifiers in the regulation of normal haematopoiesis and illustrates how the loss of normal epigenetic functionality can contribute to leukaemogenesis.
In addition to these newly defined, high-frequency mutations in SETBP1 and CSF3R, other recurrent mutations in a variety of genes including NRAS, IDH2, and CBL have recently been described in aCML at lower frequencies.
Such a splicing abnormality was more prominent in cases with SRSF2 mutations but not detected in the cases with SF3B1 mutations or WT spliceosomal genes.
Mutations have been found in different types of disease.
There was no clear pattern in these events to suggest a specific withdrawal effect (Tables S5 and S6 in the Supplementary Appendix).
PV.
An international randomized phase III study by Fenaux et al compared the hypomethylating agent 5-azacytidine with conventional care (best supportive care, low-dose cytarabine, or intensive chemotherapy) in patients with MDS (N = 358).
The main end points were overall and leukemia-free survival.
In the subgroup of patients younger than 60 years with favorable-risk AML (NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD) in a study of patients with NK-AML, IDH1 mutation was associated with a significantly decreased 5-year DFS rate (42% vs. 59%; P = .046) and trend for decreased OS rate (50% vs. 63%) compared with patients who had wild-type IDH.
At the time of CMML diagnosis, DNA from BM or PB was extracted using conventional methods.
Please Note:
The color-space reads were aligned with NovoalignCS and genotyped with GATK's Unified Genotyper.
Conceptually, mutations of spliceosomal proteins could result in defective splicing, including intron retention, altered splice site recognition, or altered alternative splicing.
Equally disturbing is the increasing incidence of treatment-related myelodysplasia and acute leukemia in survivors of tumors of childhood and young adulthood.
Carmen Vicente; Ana Conchillo; Maria A. Garcia-Sanchez; Maria D. Odero.
Differences in the mutational spectrum and clinical correlates of TET2 and IDH1 or IDH2 mutations in myeloid malignancies might be explained by the range of 2-oxoglutarate-dependent enzymes that are impaired by IDH1 and IDH2 mutations compared with TET2 mutations, which only directly affect the function of TET2.
In a murine model, N-RAS mutation led to aberrant GM-CSF signaling in myelomonocytic precursors, perhaps contributing to the development of CMML, possibly via hyperactivation of GMCSF-STAT5 pathway.
Similarly, U2AF26 mutations resulted in an alteration of RUNX1 splicing (supplemental Figure 7).
Identification of GATA2 mutations is critical for the management of these patients.
Test Validation and Proficiency Testing
Mutations or deletions in tumor-related genes are frequently accompanied by loss of the remaining allele or alleles (loss of heterozygosity, LOH), leading to the inactivation of these tumor suppressor genes, which is thought to be involved in a multi-step accumulation of gene alterations crucial to leukemogenesis.
Knockdown of LMO2 selectively impairs activation but not repression by GATA1.
The median age at the last follow-up was 18 years (range, 7-56).
Trithorax.
Pairwise comparisons of variables were performed for exploratory purposes using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and Student t test for continuous variables and the x-squared test for categorical variables.
Clinical features of cases harboring cohesin complex gene mutations.
The application of high-throughput molecular technologies, including high-density single nucleotide polymorphism arrays (SNP-As) and new sequencing technologies has led to the improved characterization of genomic lesions such as chromosomal aberrations and of somatic mutations affecting specific classes of genes, including signal transducers (eg, CBL), apoptotic genes (eg, TP53 and RAS), genes involved in epigenetic regulation of DNA (eg, DNMT3A, IDH1/2, and TET2), and histone modifiers (eg, EZH2, UTX, and ASXL1).
Mutations in exon 13, exon 15, and exon 14 other than V617F are exceptionally rare, and are observed in a broader variety of disease types.
Secondary end points included the duration of the reduction in spleen volume; the proportion of patients with a reduction in the total symptom score of 50% or more from baseline to week 24, as assessed with the modified Myelofibrosis Symptom Assessment Form (MFSAF), version 2.0 (see the Supplementary Appendix); the change in the total symptom score from baseline to week 24; and overall survival.
There is a dearth of follow-up information for MPL mutation analysis, likely because of the low number of cases identified to date.
It is not yet clear whether these differences in results are due to the differences in the diseases studied (AML versus MDS) or in the platforms used to assess alterations in methylation, which may not accurately distinguish between 5-mC and 5-hmC.
In our study, high ALC, although prognostic in a univariate analysis, lost its prognostic significance on a multi variable analysis.
Screening of GATA2 mutations in patients with mild chronic neutropenia associated with monocytopenia may be important.
Even with this "low-intensity" treatment approach, induction death occurred in 26% of patients, and overall prognosis remained poor for older patients who cannot tolerate intensive chemotherapy regimens.
In mice, Gata2 is expressed in primitive hematopoietic cells and its level gradually declines during cell maturation into different blood cell lineages.
Assays with adequate analytic sensitivity are required for the sensitive detection of JAK2 V617F, because the mutation may be present in a small fraction of the neoplastic clonal cell population.
Next-generation amplicon deep-sequencing data were analyzed using Sequence Pilot version 3.4 (JSI Medical Systems, Kippenheim, Germany).
N-RAS and K-RAS.
RESULTS.
A recent large retrospective study involved 289 patients with PMF receiving HCT from either HLA-matched identical siblings (162 patients), HLA-matched nonidentical family members (26 patients) or HLA-matched unrelated individuals (101 patients).
Several groups have found that PML-RARalpha physically interacts with PRC2 and that repression of PML-RARalpha target genes occurs in association with PRC2-mediated histone modifications (FIG. 4).
The initial evaluation of AML has 2 objectives.
A recent study of 132 patients non-RARS-T MDS demonstrated that the JAK2 V617F mutation was apparently associated with lower progression to AML and a trend to better overall survival.
The Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to evaluate survival.
Patients initially treated with high-dose cytarabine and who have significant residual blasts 7 to 10 days after completion of induction chemotherapy are considered to have experienced induction failure.
The GATA family of nuclear regulatory proteins serves as a prototype for the action of lineage-restricted transcription factors.
Significant clustering was noted for SRSF2 with both IDH1 (P = 0.0002) and IDH2 (P = 0.0009) mutations.
The terms heterozygous and homozygous have been used in the literature to describe cases with allele burdens of <50% and >=50%, respectively, but this terminology is potentially misleading.
Similarly, all mutations of SF3B1 and SRSF2 were heterozygous, and patients with somatic UPD2q33.1 or UPD17q25 (regions containing SF3B1 and SRSF2, respectively) did not harbor homozygous mutations of the associated genes.
INTRODUCTION.
In our cohort, STAG1 followed by STAG2 and SMC3 mutations were the most frequently mutated genes in the cohesin complex, whereas SMC1A mutations were rare events.
Studies have shown that FLT3-TKD mutations can occur in a subgroup of patients with the prognostically favorable NPM1 or CEBPA mutations.
In an Australian Leukemia Study Group trial, patients younger than 60 years were randomized (N = 301) to receive either high-dose cytarabine (3 g/m2 every 12 hours on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 for a total of 24 g/m2) or standard cytarabine therapy (100 mg/m2/d x 7 days via continuous infusion); patients in both arms received daunorubicin (50 mg/m2 on days 1-3) and etoposide (75 mg/m2/d x 7 days).
This Review focuses on somatic genetic alterations that result in malignant myeloid transformation by affecting DNA cytosine methylation and hydroxymethylation as well as histone methylation, acetylation, ubiquityation and phosphorylation.
TET2 mutations lead to increased self renewal of hematopoietic stem cells and myeloid hyperplasia.
Recent work suggests that ASXL1 mutations are bona fide loss-of-function mutations, and that ASXL1 loss results in loss of the transcriptionally repressive H3K27 trimethylation.
GATA1 and GATA2 are expressed principally in hematopoietic lineages, and have essential roles in the development of multiple hematopoietic cells, including erythrocytes and megakaryocytes.
Histograms of log2 expression values were then used to identify cutoffs that defined low expression of STAG2, RAD21, and SMC3 as compared with the cohort of healthy donors.
ABSTRACT.
Further studies will clarify the whole alteration of mRNA splicing profiles induced by spliceosomal gene mutations.
Discordant results were categorized as false negative if more than 15 laboratories obtained a positive result and as false positive if more than 15 laboratories obtained negative results for a given specimen.
BM smears were available at baseline for 4 patients.
Across myelofibrosis subtypes (primary myelofibrosis, post-polycythemia vera myelofibrosis, and post-essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis), patients who received ruxolitinib had a decrease in spleen volume and improvement in the total symptom score; patients receiving placebo had increases in spleen volume (P = 0.52 for interaction) and worsening of the total symptom score (P = 0.46 for interaction) (Fig.
The clinical and laboratory features of CNL include hepato/splenomegaly, persistent neutrophilic leukocytosis with minimal left shift often characterized by toxic granulation and Dohle o bodies, and elevated leukocyte alkaline phosphatase and vitamin B12 levels.
Response is then categorized as complete response or induction failure.
In the past four decades, cytogenetic and candidate-gene studies have identified recurrent somatic alterations in patients with myeloid malignancies, including myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
The PCR reactions were carried out for 35 cycles under the following conditions: 1.5 min at 94--Degree--C for denaturation, 1.5 min at 52--56--Degree--C for annealing, 2 min at 72--Degree--C for extension, and a final extension at 72--Degree--C for 5 min.
Conclusive evidence associating specific aberrant epigenetic profiles and somatic mutations with targeted therapy or with predictive value for standard therapy is lacking for the majority of cases.
In addition, detailed studies of the genomic methylation landscape of AML have identified distinct profiles that can subclassify patients based on methylation patterns and a core set of genes that are commonly methylated in AML cells compared with normal haematopoietic cells.
ET.
ABSTRACT.
The allele burden may be expressed as a ratio of mutant (mut) to wild-type (wt) alleles, or more commonly, as a percentage of mutated JAK2 alleles, calculated as (JAK2mut)/(JAK2mut + JAK2wt) x100.
Subsequent analysis of the French Severe Chronic Neutropenia Registry allowed the identification of 10 additional patients with GATA2 mutations in 6 pedigrees with unexplained mild neutropenia in at least 1 patient of the pedigree.
The methodology summary should include source information regarding any commercial primers and probes used, and it must include a statement of assay sensitivity.
Mutations in the cohesin gene complex.
Although these findings reveal novel insights into noncanonical functions of JAK2, many questions remain.
In AML, ETV6 mutation caused a loss of repressor activity, suggesting that ETV6 might have tumor suppressor features.
How the SETBP1 mutation regulates proliferative signaling remains unknown.
However, the function of hematopoietic GATA factors should be examined in an integrated context in order to fully understand their regulation.
Moreover, although PU.1 can inhibit GATA2 expression, the generation of mast cells requires cooperated functions of GATA2 and PU.1.
In 2005, it was observed that many patients with "classic BCR-ABL1-negative" MPDs (PV, ET, and PMF; Figure 1) carried the somatic mutation JAK2V617F, which had important implications for classification, diagnosis, and potential targeted therapy.
In contrast, CSF3R membrane proximal mutations strongly activate the JAK/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway and are sensitive to JAK kinase inhibitors such as ruxolitinib.
Patients completed the MFSAF every night; this electronic diary was used to evaluate symptoms of night sweats, itching, abdominal discomfort, pain under the ribs on the left side, a feeling of fullness (early satiety), muscle or bone pain, and inactivity.
Best supportive care includes red cell and platelet transfusions to alleviate symptoms of anemia and thrombocytopenia; prophylactic antibiotic and antifungal drugs to reduce the risk of infection; and hydroxyurea for management of leukocytosis.
Analysis of a large series of CN-AML patients suggests that BCOR mutations may confer a poorer prognosis.
The cumulative incidence of anemia, thrombocytopenia, marked leukocytosis, thrombotic events, and leukemic transformation was estimated with a competing risk approach, considering death for any cause as a competing event.
The CBL (Casitas B-lineage lymphoma) gene, located at 11q23.3, encodes a protein with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity that is thought to be a negative regulator of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling driving the oncogenesis pathway.
Age >65 years old, hemoglobin level <10 g/dL, leukocyte count >25 x 109/L, circulating blasts >=1%, and the presence of constitutional symptoms are considered negative predictive risk factors by the International Prognostic Scoring System.
Patients who receive high-dose cytarabine should be closely monitored for changes in renal function, because renal dysfunction is highly correlated with increased risk of cerebellar toxicity.
A large German trial has revealed additional molecular prognostic markers for patients with NK-AML.
In ET and PMF, JAK2 V617F mutations and/or MPL exon 10 mutations are present in approximately 60% to 70% of patients, with no other well-defined, recurrent JAK2 or MPL mutations found in the remaining patients.
Mutation descriptors are not translated into the standard HGVS nomenclature, to avoid misinterpretation.
However, the spectrum of these mutations overlaps largely with that in AML, complicating the understanding of MDS-specific pathogenesis that discriminates MDS from AML.
Eight of the 33 TP53 mutant samples (24.2%) had abnormalities of chromosome 17 (P<0.001), suggesting that mutation and chromosomal loss are frequently found together, abrogating the activity of wildtype TP53.
The dose was adjusted for lack of efficacy or excess toxicity as specified in the protocol (see the Supplementary Appendix).
Overall, SF3B1 mutations were less prevalent in patients with advanced forms of MDS, indicating that mutation of this factor does not contribute to progression (Figure 2A).
Importantly, conditional TET2 loss in the haematopoietic compartment leads to the development of myeloid leukaemia, most accurately characterized as CMML.
In contrast to the V617F mutation, which involves one amino acid codon, exon 12 mutations affect a larger region, spanning codons 533 to 547.
Clinical evolution.
Category 2A: Based upon lower-level evidence, there is uniform NCCN consensus that the intervention is appropriate.
CMML is characterized by persistent peripheral blood (PB) monocytosis >1 x 109/l, absence of the BCR-ABL1 fusion, absence of rearrangements of the PDGFRA or PDGFRB genes, absence of >=20% myeloblasts or promonocytes in the blood and bone marrow (BM) and presence of dysplasia in one or more myeloid lineages.
However, based on the substantial difference in relapse-free survival data between the Intermediate I and Intermediate II groups defined by ELN, the NCCN has continued to place NK-AML with FLT3-ITD mutations in the unfavorable risk group rather than the intermediate risk group (see "Risk Status Based on Cytogenetics and Molecular Abnormalities," on page 995).
The majority of GATA2 mutations have been identified in MDS/AML, Emberger, or MonoMAC syndrome patients.
THE COHESIN COMPLEX.
Adverse events of grade 3 or higher developed in 8 of 49 patients in the ruxolitinib group (16.3%) and in 7 of 54 patients in the placebo group (13.0%) after interruption of the study drug and in 12 of 21 patients in the ruxolitinib group (57.1%) and 17 of 37 patients in the placebo group (45.9%) after discontinuation.
Under normal circumstances, the CSF3R ligand, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), promotes growth and survival of myeloid precursor cells, ultimately leading to differentiation of these myeloid precursors into neutrophils.
Allele-specific qPCR also allows for quantification of the mutant as a percentage of all of the JAK2 alleles, as an estimate of disease burden.
This region was shared by 13 out of 14 subjects with deletions, as well as by the two subjects with UPD, and encompassed two genes, CUL1 and EZH2 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1).
In addition, they do not carry JAK2 (V617F), which is instead found in two-thirds of PMF patients.
Adverse effects were reported in 89% of patients, and treatment was stopped in 24% due to toxicity.
TET1, but not TET2, can recruit Polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs) through direct binding to the trans criptional regulator SIN3A.
Moreover, GATA2 inhibits the erythroid differentiation through the regulation of EPO, which is the major growth factor that controls the red blood cell production through the promotion of survival, proliferation and differentiation of the erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow.
ETV6 mutation was recently found in the patients with MDS transformed to chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
In the Italian report, transformation to acute leukemia occurred in 22 patients (40%), with a median time from diagnosis of 18 months.
White blood cells can be obtained by simply performing a red blood cell lysis procedure.
However, GATA2 and GATA3 replacement strains displayed significant thrombocytopenia, with 2 to 3-fold reductions in platelet counts.
Laboratory tests for these mutations have become standard in assessing clinically suspected BCR-ABL1-negative MPN.
ABSTRACT.
In addition, the expression of IDH1 or IDH2 mutants in mouse bone-marrow-derived cells induced the expression of markers associated with immature (less differentiated) cells, a phenotype that is similar to Tet2-knockdown or Tet2-knockout cells.
Average depth was 124x.
The 4-year DFS rate for patients receiving consolidation with 3 g/m2 of high-dose cytarabine was 44%, with a 5% treatment-related mortality rate and a 12% incidence of severe neurologic toxicity.
Overall, these mutations appeared to be more prevalent in refractory anemia with excess blasts type II (23%) than in refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB) type I (14%) and MDS unclassifiable (14%) and were not observed in MDS with isolated del(5q).
[END OF ABSTRACT].
In vitro studies have shown that short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated silencing of TET2 expression leads to impaired haematopoietic differentiation.
To examine the clinical effects of mutations in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes, we evaluated all 439 samples for all the genes identified above, as well as a set of 13 genes previously reported to be mutated in hematologic cancers.
Finally, a U2 snRNP complex replaces SF1 bound to the branchpoint sequence with one of its subcomponent, SF3B1, to establish a splicing A complex (Fig. 1).
We evaluated the prognostic relevance of several clinical and laboratory parameters in 226 Mayo Clinic patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML): 152 (67%) males and median age 71 years.
A recent study demonstrated that this specific mutation is one of the important biomarkers for response to DNTMIs.
Eight patients had nine frameshift mutations at the N-terminal region resulting in truncation of the proteins.
Patients were also randomized to receive all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) or no ATRA.
Data from 3 large studies have identified monosomal karyotypes (defined as having >= 2 autosomal monosomies, or a single monosomy with additional structural abnormalities) as a subset of unfavorable cytogenetic prognosticators.
In patients older than 60 years, no major difference was observed (9.6 vs. 11.6 months, respectively).
Congenital neutropenia is a group of genetic disorders that involve chronic neutropenia and susceptibility to infections.
CSF3R and SETBP1 mutational overlap.
For a qPCR assay, the threshold for a positive result must be determined, because of cross-amplification of the wild-type allele.
Even though these measures are integrated into the IPSS, TP53 mutations remained strongly associated with shorter overall survival after adjustment for IPSS risk group (P<0.001), indicating that these mutations adversely affect survival through other means (Fig. 5 in the Supplementary Appendix).
Twenty-seven patients died during follow-up, with a cumulative nonrelapse mortality at 1 year of 16%.
Mutation analysis was performed by sequencing the nine exons and adjacent intronic splice-junction regions of PTEN/MMAC1.
The 5-year cumulative rate of relapse risk was also similar between treatment arms (39% vs. 27%, respectively).
Furthermore, Pimanda et al described a regulatory circuit among GATA2, FLI1 and SCL/TAL1, leading to the notion that switching on the GATA2/FLI1/SCL triad could be a prerequisite for specifying HSCs.
Reported P-values are two-sided and not corrected for multiple testing.
Most initial treatment decisions for AML are based on age, history of prior myelodysplasia or cytotoxic therapy, and performance status.
Five SNVs were identified further and confirmed by classic Sanger sequencing: EPHB6 T483P, GATA2 R396Q, IMPG2 P1161L, NEK11 D87Y, and TTN P4737R.
Almost all patients receiving ruxolitinib had some degree of reduction in spleen volume (Fig. 1B).
The monthly prevalence of grade 3 or 4 anemia and the proportion of patients requiring transfusions (1 or more units of red cells) also followed a pattern that was consistent with changes in the hemoglobin level over time (Fig.
In addition, mutations in specific epigenetic modifiers including DNMT3A and MLL predict benefit from dose-intensified induction therapy with daunorubicin, which suggests that these mutant disease alleles affect the response to classical cytotoxic therapies.
The majority of the ZRSR2 mutated cases were male, in which single mutations resulted in complete loss of functions.
The intersection of ASXL1-bound genomic regions - as identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) - and gene expression profiling resulted in the identification of specific targets of ASXL1, including the HOXA cluster of genes, the expression of which increases with ASXL1 loss or mutation.
A total of 38.2% of the patients had IPSS intermediate-2-risk disease, and 61.2% had high-risk disease.
Traditional allele-specific PCR and allele-specific qPCR assays have also been used, but these assays are limited to assessing specific mutations.
Figure 1.  Mutations and Cytogenetic Abnormalities in 223 Samples with at Least One Mutation.  Mutations in the 11 most frequently mutated gene groups are shown by colored bars.  Each column represents 1 of the 223 samples with a mutation in one or more of the genes listed.  Darker bars indicate samples with two or more distinct mutations in that gene group.  The karyotype of each of the 223 samples is also shown.
Of the 5 patients with STAG2 mutations, 2 patients were female and 3 were male.
In addition, the GATA2 protein contains putative modification motifs, through which cellular signals can regulate the stability of GATA2 in hematopoietic cells.
S505N mutation has been associated with familial autosomal dominant thrombocytosis.
The reduction in spleen volume was durable with continued therapy (Fig. 1C).
The clinical and prognostic implications of DNMT3A mutations in chronic myeloid malignancies are not yet clarified.
Monocytosis and basophilia are not prominent (<2% peripheral blood basophils, <10% peripheral blood monocytes), and the leukocyte alkaline phosphatase level may be low, normal, or increased, therefore lacking diagnostic utility.
Environmental factors that have long been established to increase the risks of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and AML include prolonged exposure to petrochemicals; solvents such as benzene; pesticides; and ionizing radiation.
Harada et al. found that patients with de novo or secondary MDS/AML carrying RUNX1 mutations had a significantly poorer overall survival than those without mutations.
The possible role of PRC1 alterations in myeloid malignancies.
The cohesin complex is composed of 2 long structural maintenance proteins, SMC1A and SMC3, which heterodimerize at the hinge domain, forming a closed loop by binding at the alpha-klesin end to RAD21 and adapter proteins STAG1/STAG2.
Both patients with SMC1A mutations were male.
Currently, various driver mutations identified in MDS represent genes involved in pathways important in epigenetic regulation, including chromatin modification and DNA methylation, transcriptional regulation, DNA repair/tumor suppressor, signal transduction, RNA splicing machinery, and the cohesion complex (Table 1).
Interestingly, these mutations appeared to co-occur in patients who had RUNX1 and DNMT3A mutations and were associated with inferior OS and higher risk of leukemic transformation.
Fig. 3. (A) SSCP analysis of PTEN/MMAC1 exon 5.  Altered mobility band (arrowhead) present in PCR products amplified from the leukemia cell line U937 DNA is seen in lane 3. (B) The result of sequencing of the altered band shows a 4-bp (CCCG) insertion at nucleotide 1423.
Two cases showed a complex deletion from exons 1 to 8 but retained 21 bp of exon 7 (Fig. 2).
SF3B1 mutations are commonly associated with myeloid neoplasms expressing ring sideroblasts.
Notably, these salvage treatment options are aggressive regimens intended for appropriate patients who can tolerate such therapies; for other patents, less aggressive treatment options may include low-dose cytarabine or hypomethylating agents.
All the reactions were repeated at least three times with controls.
Gene expression profiling.
By contrast, mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 seem to be significantly associated with mutations in NPM1, and NPM1-IDH1 or NPM1-IDH2 co-mutant patients comprise a subset of intermediate-risk AML with remarkably favourable clinical outcome.
However, we could not detect a significant difference in OS when subgroups with RS were analyzed separately, perhaps because of low number of WT cases.
Aberrations of EZH2 at chromosome 7q36.1 were detected in 29 bone marrow samples from 126 individuals with MDS. Genomic sequencing of the coding region and the splice donor and acceptor sites revealed missense mutations, donor-splice-site mutations, deletions and insertions, predicting amino acid substitutions and truncations.
Median OS was 17.7 years in CALR-mutant, 9.2 years in JAK2-mutant, 9.1 years in MPL-mutant, and 3.2 years in triple-negative patients, as shown in Figure 4.
Full sequencing of JAK2 and MPL, as well as other genes relevant for MPNs, may be performed in this manner.
In terms of prognostic significance, N-RAS mutation does not appear to independently affect survival in MDS, although it is linked to severe thrombocytopenia.
For example, DNMT3A, TET2, IDH1/2 and ASXL1 are among most frequent targets of gene mutations in both MDS and normal karyotype AML.
In aCML, the majority of SETBP1 mutations are located in a 14 amino acid stretch that is also mutated in Schinzel-Giedion syndrome, a rare genetic disease characterized by congenital malformations, mental retardation, and a high prevalence of epithelial tumors.
Outside the hematopoietic system, GATA2 collaborates in the development of the endothelial cells, adipocytes, and the nervous system.
Mutational frequencies of ASXL1 are listed as reported in the original referenced manuscripts (this may include the controversial ASXL1 pGly646fsX12 variant (REF. 83)).
Abnormal RNA splicing caused by splicing factor mutations.
No consensus result was obtained with four of the specimens.
Notably, however, in patients with CBF AML who were treated with postremission therapy with high-dose cytarabine, the presence of c-KIT mutations resulted in poorer outcomes.
The outcome once the MDS or the AML occurred was extremely poor: none of the patients treated only by chemotherapy was alive in contrast to the 6 patients receiving HSCT (Table 1).
Fig. 3. The cohesin complex. Adopted and modified based on Ocampo-Hafalla M T, and Uhlmann F J. Cell Sci 2011;124:685-691. SCC family members include SA1 and SA2 in vertebrate, which are encoded by STAG1 and STAG2. The cohesin complex is composed of ATP-bound proteins including SMC1, SMC3, and SCC1 forming an embracing ring. Pds5, Scc3 and Wpl1 proteins interact with the ring and modulate its function. Cohesin is loaded on the chromosomes prior to DNA replication with the help of Scc2/Scc4 cohesin loader. During loading reaction, the ATP bound between SMC3/SMC1 head domains is hydrolyzed, which is catalyzed by the Scc2-Scc4 complex. Once the new complex is formed, cohesin is enabled to encircle the DNA, which allows translocation of cohesin rings along the DNA in response to transcription, leading to their accumulation between convergent gene pairs (RNA-polymerase-II-transcribed genes and their direction of transcription). During DNA replication it is acetylated by Eco1 acetyltransferase. The release of cohesin from DNA happens at the beginning of the anaphase and SCC1 subunit is cleaved by separase, a protease. Cohesin is deacetylated by Hos1 deacetylase and released from chromosomes. Mutations in cohesin complex will lead to abnormal mitosis or meiosis. Note: *frequent mutation site.
The commonly used MDAPS was developed on a cohort of 213 CMML patients and identified four risk groups based on the hemoglobin level, presence of IMC, ALC and BM blasts.
ASXL1 mutations in epigenetic repatterning and myeloid transformation.
Patient number 6184 (P2, II, 1) was diagnosed at the age of 13 with an AML M5.
In another study, IDH mutations (IDH1 and IDH2 combined) were associated with significantly inferior 5-year relapse-free survival rates (37% vs. 67%; P = .02) and OS rates (41% vs. 65%; P = .03) in the subgroup of patients with favorable-risk AML (normal karyotype with NPM1 mutation without FLT3-ITD).
Instead, the mutations are tumorigenic by alteration of the catalytic activity of the enzymes, resulting in accumulation of D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG) as the reduction product of alpha-KG.
MPLW515L results from a guanine-to-thymine transversion at nucleotide 1544, with substitution of tryptophan to leucine at codon 515.
Patients who received at least 4 cycles of treatment were assessed by modified International Working Group criteria.
ELN classifies patients with t(9;11)(p22;q23), MLLT3-MLL and other cytogenetic abnormalities that fall into neither the favorable or adverse category into the "Intermediate II" group.
Although activation of tyrosine kinase pathways is a shared theme among myeloproliferative neoplasms, the pathogenetic basis of chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) has remained elusive.
Cohesin mutations likely represent secondary events in clonal hierarchy and contribute to clonal transformation.
Current treatments for BCR-ABL1-negative MPN are considered noncurative and focus primarily on reducing the risk of complications.
Treatment for PMF is dependent on both the absolute risk category and the presence of anemia, splenomegaly, or both.
How Should the Results of JAK2 and MPL Mutation Testing Be Reported?
In this study, we analyzed a large cohort of patients with CMML to define the prevalence and types of RUNX1 mutations.
The adverse effect of chromosome 7 and 7q deletions on the prognosis of individuals with MDS is well known.
Sequences were compared to the reference genomic sequence NT_007914.15 and the deduced protein sequences were compared to reference NP_004447.2. In subjects 44 and 104, the 7q deletion that was identified on the SNP array was missed by karyotype analysis. In subject 43, the 7q deletion that was revealed by karyotype analysis was not detected by a SNP array analysis.
A between-group comparison of adverse events reported after interruption or permanent discontinuation of the study drug showed no clear pattern of a specific withdrawal effect.
Prognostic scores were analyzed as both a fixed and a time-dependent covariate.
We did not find major differences between CALR-mutant patients with the 52-bp deletion (type 1 mutation) and those with the 5-bp insertion (type 2 mutation).
As in our previous study of TSG101, the abnormal transcripts may result from aberrant RNA splicing as evidenced by the presence of both these aberrant transcripts and normal full length transcripts in all specimens examined.
Furthermore, patients with mutant TP53 and a complex karyotype had a paucity of mutations in other genes, suggesting that this group could be considered to have a distinct molecular subclass of myelodysplastic syndromes with a unique pathogenic mechanism.
The potential prognostic value of IDH, EZH2 and SRSF2 mutations in PMF were previously suggested by single center studies.
Cohesin mutations were significantly associated with RUNX1, Ras-family oncogenes, and BCOR and ASXL1 mutations and were most prevalent in high-risk MDS and secondary AML.
The SWOG/ECOG trial reported a 5-year survival rate (from time of CR) of 44% with allogeneic HSCT (n = 18; 61% underwent HSCT) and 13% with autologous HSCT (n = 20; 50% underwent HSCT) among the subgroup of patients with unfavorable cytogenetics; moreover, the 5-year survival rate was similar between those allocated to autologous HSCT and those intended for chemotherapy consolidation alone (13% and 15%, respectively).
P-values <0.05 were considered significant.
Low-risk patients with platelet counts >1000 x 109/L are considered separately (Table 4).
Interestingly, in this latter study, non-R882 DNMT3A mutations were significantly associated with poorer outcomes in patients younger than 60 years (but not R882 mutations); in contrast, in patients aged 60 years and older, DNMT3A-R882 mutations (but not non-R882 mutations) were associated with significantly decreased DFS (3-year rate, 3% vs. 21%; P = .006) and OS (3-year rate, 4% vs. 24%; P = .01).
To evaluate the role of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in leukemia, bone marrow and/or peripheral blood from 62 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients, 5 hemopoietic cell lines (HL60, U937, Raji, KG-1, K562), and 30 normal controls were analyzed.
Leukemic cells from peripheral blood or bone marrow were collected from patients at diagnosis, and genomic DNA was extracted, whole genome amplified (GenomePlex whole genome amplification kit, Sigma-Aldrich, Seelze, Germany) and polymerase chain reaction amplified for 119 amplicons with not more than 5 amplicons per well using standard conditions.
The genetic, epigenetic and functional data suggest that TET2 and IDH mutations form a novel mutational complementation group in myeloid leukaemia, and indicate that mutational studies may identify additional disease alleles that alter DNA hydroxymethylation in different malignancies.
Effects of spliceosomal mutations on spliceosomal function.
[ARTICLE].
Mechanisms underlying the function of these regulators are highly stringent, as deviations in their expression, chromatin site selection, and protein-protein interactions elicit catastrophic phenotypes.
In addition, in supplemental Table 1, we clarified the mutational status of spliceosomal genes.
In this study, they dissect the function of GATA2 in normal and aberrant megakaryopoiesis, showing that GATA2 promotes megakaryopoiesis by driving progenitor cell proliferation and megakaryocytic lineage gene expression, while suppressing myeloid gene expression.
In this situation, it is necessary for the laboratory to establish the minimal amount of signal needed to confidently call a sample positive.
This process is termed the 'GATA switch'.
However, the prognostic value of ETV6 translocation has not been fully investigated in myeloid neoplasms.
The cumulative incidence of thrombocytopenia was significantly lower in CALR-mutant patients compared with the remaining ones (P = .001), whereas no significant difference was observed between triple-negative and JAK2-mutant (P = .292) or MPL-mutant patients (P = .627) (Figure 1B).
In a study using direct sequencing, lower frequencies of the JAK2 V617F were found in all three classical MPN entities: 65% in PV, 23% in ET, and 30% in PMF.
The functional differences between these proteins have not been studied in detail, but this might be of interest since the shorter protein lacks part of the C-ZnF domain.
Statistical methods.
In our analysis, the allelelic burden of mutations in the cohesin genes were very similar to that observed for NPM1 mutations.
The prognostic relevance of RUNX1 mutations in CMML has not been determined earlier.
High expression of GATA2 in AML was first reported by Shimamoto et al, who found it in 87% of cases (54/62) using RT-PCR.
In this Review we discuss recent genetic and functional data implicating mutations in epigenetic modifiers, including tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), IDH2, additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), in the pathogenesis of MPN, MDS and AML, and discuss how this knowledge is leading to novel clinical, biological and therapeutic insights.
Table 1. Clinical characteristics of patients participating in this study.
Abnormalities in cytosine methylation may result from mutations in TET2, DNMT3A, and IDH1/2.
However, very few WGATAR motifs are occupied in genomes.
Genes that belong to the cohesin complex in somatic vertebrate cells are SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21 (SCC1), STAG2 (SA-2), and STAG1 (SA-1); these genes form a ring structure that regulates chromosome segregation during meiosis and mitosis.
There are two different mRNA transcripts with 3484 and 3263 base pairs (Fig. 1).
Traditional therapeutic options, including splenectomy, have limited benefit.
Sequencing of large cohorts has identified mutations and deletions in MDS (8%, 18/224), CMML (10%, 9/88), and AML (12%, 19/157) patients.
He died suddenly at the age of 36 from aortic dissection.
In line with these observations, the current study identifies additional submicroscopic genetic changes, such as ASXL1 mutations, which cluster with normal karyotype and yet portend a poor prognosis.
Together, these results demonstrate that the SCL complex is a crucial regulator of the positive transcriptional activity of GATA1 and GATA2 in several hematopoietic lineages, probably by modulating the activity of GATA1 cofactors to specify transcriptional activation.
In the subgroup of these patients with AML, a significant survival benefit was found with 5-azacytidine compared with conventional care regimens, with a median OS of 24.5 versus 16 months (hazard ratio [HR], 0.47; 95% CI, 0.28-0.79; P = .005).
Four nonsense mutations were located in the RHD that generate termination codons resulting in truncated RUNX1 proteins.
A risk-assessment system to evaluate the prognosis of newly diagnosed patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
Second, and more importantly, emerging genetic data suggest that there are additional classes of mutations that commonly occur in patients with myeloid malignancies.
It will soon be possible for clinicians to detect a broad range of point mutations in peripheral blood with the use of sensitive genotyping methods, which will not only improve prognostication in myelodysplastic syndromes but also facilitate the diagnosis of these disorders, the evaluation of disease progression, and the monitoring of response to treatment.
This includes decreased expression of signaling effectors (NRAS, JAK1, and CBL) and reduced expression of HIF1A, suggesting a novel mechanism of transformation for patients with myeloid malignancies characterized by alterations in the cohesin complex.
This led to metabolic studies that showed that mutant IDH proteins acquire a neomorphic enzymatic activity that converts alpha-ketoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG).
In general, supportive care measures may include the use of blood products or transfusion support, tumor lysis prophylaxis, neurologic assessments, antiinfective prophylaxis, and use of growth factors.
In addition, the mutation status of the RUNX1 gene was also correlated with the clinicohematological features and outcome in CMML patients to determine its clinical and prognostic relevance.
Studies that compared hydroxyurea with anagrelide and with pipobroman also showed no difference in leukemogenic potential between these drugs.
Stata Version 10 software was used for all statistical analyses.
These candidate alterations were subtracted by the results of CD3+ peripheral blood DNA and subsequently validated with Sanger sequencing (see "Sanger sequencing analysis").
Because a familial MDS/AML was suspected in pedigree 1, we looked for a putative germline mutation.
One patient (no. 26) had 780_797 duplication and 798 T>C; cloning analysis revealed that the mutations were located on the same allele, which resulted in frameshift and a stop at codon 460.
Patients with PML-RARA or t(15;17)-positive AML were excluded from these trials.
A comparison of clinicohematological features between CMML patients with and without RUNX1 mutations was carried out (Supplementary Table 2).
LOH analysis in our 20 AML cases (all lacked chromosome 10 or 10q deletions) with hair follicle constitutional DNA showed that regions defined by markers D10S215, D10S541, D10S579, and AFM086 were intact in both alleles.
Mutations in codon 132 of IHD1 (Arg132) and codon 172 of IHD2 (Arg172) appear to be associated with shorter OS; however, Arg140Q mutations in IHD2 were not linked to poor prognosis in MDS.
Of the patients with RUNX1 mutations, 11 had normal karyotypes with one partial tandem duplication of MLL; trisomy 13, trisomy 21, monosomy 7 and complex anomaly were detected in one patient each, and none had -5/5q- (Table 1).
Systematic screening studies found that such mutations do not only occur as sole abnormalities but are often found in combination, probably contributing to the phenotypic heterogeneity found in MDS.
MPL.
Thus, in addition to basic cytogenetic analysis, new molecular markers help to refine prognostics groups, particularly in patients with a normal karyotype.
Patient number 7015 (P6, II, 2), born from healthy parents, presented with several warts in the extremities and on the forehead at the age of 4.
When compared with the cohesin WT cohort, cooccurring mutations in RUNX1 (P = .0001), Ras-family oncogenes (P = .0001), BCOR (n = 15; P = .003), and ASXL1 (P = .03) were significantly enriched in patients with cohesin mutations (Figure 2 and supplemental Table 7).
